Nurse Laurie Schroeder's hand rose in small jerks as if it were
surprising itself, each movement bringing the middle knuckle of her mid-
dle finger inexorably closer to the tip of her nose.

"You've had that knuckle all of your life," said a soothing,
pleasant, seemingly neverending voice beside her, "but I'll bet you've
never really taken the time to study that knuckle.  And that is your job,
your only job, the only thing I want you to do.

"As you look at that knuckle you'll see lines that meet, lines that
intersect, lines that dead end.  Even after you think you've seen all
there is to see about that knuckle, every once in a while you'll see
something new.  It may be a difference in color between the knuckle and
the rest of the finger, it might be a difference in texture....and each
time you see something different your hand will become lighter, the hand
will rise more and more into the air, and the knuckle will come closer
and closer to your nose...."  "Nurse!"

The shout and the howl of anguish following it jolted Laurie
Schroeder upright; it also caused Hartley McVey a painful spasm at the
site of his incision.

"I'm sorry," she said to Hartley.  He gingerly swung his legs and
feet back into his hospital bed and waved away her apology.
"You're a terrific subject, Laurie," he said.  "No harm done, and
don't worry about a thing.  I'll certainly be here for a while.  We'll
have another chance.  Maybe later, after you take care of Mr. Harris."
"Right," she said and twisted her upper lip into a face that spoke
volumes.  Three times Hartley had tried to hypnotize her, and all three
times Abbott Harris, two rooms away,  had broken the spell.  It was not a
matter of bad timing.  Any time would have been bad simply because Abbott
Harris never seemed to shut up.  "I'll be back when you get your Tens
unit anyway," nurse Schroeder said as she left.

 He'd almost forgotten.  The Tens unit.  If it worked, blocking
pain signals going to his brain with little measured jolts of its own
electricity, he might be able to reduce his use of pain medication.
Hartley looked forward to trying it.  Even if it didn't work, it was a
gadget, and Hartley loved gadgets.

"Oh my God, for the love of G-O-D, please.  Nurse!"

Attila the Hun would have melted, Hartley thought.
He looked over at Willie in the next bed.  Finally he was asleep or
seemed to be, and Hartley breathed as deeply as his staples allowed.  He
liked Willie, but Willie could be tiring...literally tiring.  Straight
out of a Dannon yogurt commercial, Willie was a 93-year-old Georgian who
could pace for hours while in barely decipherable English relive his
middle-age World War II exploits behind German lines and then suddenly
and limberly drop into a near lotus position while he explained the phi-
losophy behind execution.  Hartley was awed by the old man and unabashed-
ly envious.  Willie was "in" for a "tune-up" as he put it to put his 63-
year-old son's mind to rest by proving he didn't have anything wrong with
him.

Hartley had just had his gallbladder and a chunk of intestine
removed.  What was so annoying was Willie's inability to understand how
anything could go wrong in only 45 years.  He had a 122-year-old uncle,
he said, and Hartley believed him.  He also said his uncle still had his
gallbladder, and Hartley believed that, too.

"Oh God, nurse, oh, please...." Harris plaintively wailed, his plea
penetrating the entire east wing.  As usual, several visitors had left
the rooms of those they'd come to visit and begun to file by Hartley's
door to gather outside Harris' room; they were the unititiated.  Those
who'd on an earlier occasion raced to see if they could help the poor man
so obviously being mistreated by the staff no longer bothered.
"God..." the outcry muted abruptly.

Nurse Schroeder had arrived.

  Hartley looked at his watch.  It wasn't time for Harris' pain
shot yet, so Hartley figured he'd either wanted his pillow fluffed or had
run out of ice water.
"He noisy," Willie observed, still lying on his side, his eyes
closed.  Hartley wondered if Willie really had been asleep at all.  Or if
he ever slept.

"He is that, Willie.  I doubt Mr. Belski ever in his life thought
he'd be lucky to be in a coma."  Belski was Harris' rommate; theirs was
one of the more perfect matches made in Angel of Mercy administration.
"Mr. Harris is lonely," Willie said.

"Aren't we all."

"No," Willie said.  He'd accepted Hartley's statement as a ques-
tion.  "Most have somebody, even an enemy.  He has no time to make
friends, so he makes enemies.  Easier."

"Maybe if I get to be your age I'll be as smart as you," Hartley
said, meaning it.

"You won't get to be my age."

A spasm raced through Hartley's abdomen; Willie, of course was
right, Hartley thought, but he asked anyway: "Why not?"

"Because you keep saying maybe," Willie answered, and, his eyes
still closed, grinned exaggeratedly.

"I tell people things like that, Willie.  I make my living telling
people things like that.  It doesn't mean I have to believe them."

"People pay you to put them to sleep, yes?"

"Well that's part of it.  I also sell them crystals to help them
meditate and tap into their higher levels of self-awareness. All very
scientific."

Willie emitted a high nonagenarian giggle.

"You think you're a pretty good crook, huh?  Thief."

"I'm not a thief, Willie.  I resent that. There are many more
forces at work around us than you can measure with  yardsticks and
clocks.  At your age, you should know that."

"At my age I do know that."

"Well, then, even if the sciences of cards and crystals and medita-
tion are still a little crude -- we only entered The Age of Aquarius in
1975 -- that doesn't mean people can't benefit from them.  My clients
find...peace of mind.  That's not crooked, and I'm not a thief."  "Do you
believe in..." Willie just waved his right hand in circles.

What I believe -- or don't -- doesn't matter.  If they think a rock
will solve their problems and their problems are solved, who cares about
the rock?"

"You are right.  Total right," Willie said.  "That's your problem."

"Now what the hell does that mean?"

"It means that you are right.  You have troubles with English?  You
are right.  To be at peace is a wonderful thing -- the only big thing.
To make people be at peace is very good...very honorable.  The rocks and
the words, they don't matter; you are right, but you don't believe you
are right.  You really believe you are a thief."

Hartley sighed.  It wasn't time for a shot or a pill or even a meal
-- anything that would break up the day.  And save him from listening to
Willie, which became increasingly taxing as days passed, especially when
Willie was right or even stood a chance of being right.

Hartley had what he described as a "flexible" past.  Four years as
a New York City cop followed by eight years as a news reporter and
preceded by jobs ranging from bus boy to guinea pig for submarine escape
suit tests for the Navy in Antartic temperature water.  Interspersed with
a year as a hypnotist.  Flexible might not be the right word, but it
suited him.

Not a specialist in anything and having simply seen and done too
much, Hartley had carried if you can't beat 'em join 'em a step further
to joining them and being able to laugh at them.  Sometimes the laughter
was a little forced, but, for the most part, Hartley was satisfied with
his life.  In the relative lull, the only sounds those of sqeaky IV poles
and the occasionally murmuring intercom,  Hartley reflected on his past
and wondered is flexible might not simply be flippant.  There had been a
time he'd really believed he could make a difference in the world; he'd
even campaigned for Eugene McCarthy.  Gradually, though, the mileage had
built up on Hartley.  Husbands beating wives who'd gladly stab the cop
who tried to stop it, loonies proudly taking credit for blowing up
strangers, streams of dead kids or dead cabbies interspersed with jewelers
robbing themselves for the insurance.

One very tired, very rainy night on the curving driveway of the
Jacob Javits Convention Center as he stared into the trunk of an abandon-
ed car trying to figure out how many people were entangled in the bloody
mess inside, he'd realized the whole damned world was orchestrated, that
all these things were factored into the mechanism, and that as a cop he
was no more than one extra moving part.

Three, he'd figured.  Definitely six hands and only three with
watches.

It was an epiphany for Hartley.  He was not meant to fix things, to
make them right.  He was meant to do exactly what he was doing because
part of the Grand Scheme called for three dead people with six hands and
three watches to be in a car trunk, and another part of The Plan said
there had to be somebody around to count them.  He was not meant to fix
things because they weren't broken.

And in a world where everything is as it should be, what can you do
to bitch about it?

You write about it.

The newspapers and broadcast media didn't hold much interest for
Hartley -- without having to try them he knew working for them would
amount to no more than changing his place in The Mechanism.  But he had
good contacts throughout the media.  So, with a downtown buddy assuring  he
got a coveted New York City police press card, he set up McVey Fea-
tures.  He freelanced for everybody, took assignments from anybody, and
in violation of contemporary wisdom of the New York journalism scene,
prospered.

Within two years he'd hired a few NYU students to monitor the po-
lice radios, and when Frank Adderly had gotten tired of taking corpse
pictures for forensic and decided to join Hartley, McVey Features ex-
panded its services to providing art.  By his fourth year he was success-
ful enough to make the news and broadcast unions officially edgy -- which
he didn't want to do mostly because a lot of those people were personal
friends, so he backed off, hung around the United Nations, wrote some
samples, and pretty soon was stringing for English-language papers from
Dublin to Tel Aviv.

Then one night he and Frank walked into a foyer of a walkup in
Chelsea, had stood stock still and looked at each other.  Hartley sniffed
the air again.  So did Frank.

"Dead person," he said, and Frank agreed.

And so Hartley had had another epiphany -- or perhaps it was just
an obvious milepost.

When you can smell the difference between a dead human and a dead
cat, it's time to move on.

Hartley had moved on with a vengeance.  If he was destined to be a
moving part, then he would really move.  If he couldn't change the world
-- and by then Hartley truthfully wasn't sure he wanted to anymore --
then he was going to do his damndest to enjoy playing games with it.
And so was born Golden Grail Associates.

With the help (and inspiration) of a prudish nude dancer named Daf-
fodil and a lot of research, Hartley became the New Age wizard of the Up-
per East Side.  He tarot-ed 'em, hypnotized 'em and crystallized 'em.
And they loved it to well into six figures a year.  And that gave him
enough cushion to take a vacation whenever his clients were too happy
with him and he was in danger of taking himself seriously.

A problem he never would face with Willie, whose 93 years made him
too damned shrewd.

"Nurse Laurie, she wants to lose weight, right?"  Willie more
stated than asked, bringing him back to his bland beige room, his IV
tubes, his naso-gastric tube and the drain that dumped greenish black
gunk from his insides to a plastic bag dngling from the bed.

"Yeah.  About 20 pounds.  She'll look terrific."

"And with this knuckle thing you can talk her into losing weight,
right?"

"Something like that."

"Then your not a thief."

"Of course I'm not a thief. I told you I'm not a thief.  I'm not
even charging her!"

Willie cackled.  "Sure you charging her.  Your belly hurts, you get
your medicine quick, right?  You get it quicker than Mr. Harris, right?
Everybody charge everybody," he said and lapsed into deeper laughter.
Hartley rolled more onto his left side, holding his breath to allow
his freshly disturbed innards to settle.  He wished he could take a nap.
He wished the $3.50-a-day television had cable.  He'd have settled for an
orderly with a wheel chair cruising in to tell him he had a date with x-
ray.  Anything that would break up the monotony of the hospital day.  And
shut up Willie.

An attractive brunnette just then breezed into the room carrying a
small plastic case in one hand and a clipboard in the other.  "Mr. McVey?"
she called, and Hartley raised his hand.  The brunnette bounced over.
Hartley didn't miss the appreciative look she got from Willie.  "I'm
Jeannette from physical therapy," she said.  "I've got your Tens here."

"Good, I've been looking forward to this."

"You want to avoid drugs?  People are becoming very responsible
about avoiding drugs."  The shape of her neck made him want to respond to
the approval in her voice, but he just wasn't in the mood for a scam.
"Not really, Jeanette.  I just think that choosing to hurt when you
don't have to means your problems aren't limited to your gall bladder.
I'll take medication, electrocution or a sharp tap behind my left ear if
it will get rid of the pain."

"Oh."  Her disppointment at least skittered like a cirrus cloud
across a bright sun, to be quickly gone.  "You'll find it reduces your
drug dependence anyway."

Hartley appreciated the neverending human proclivity for finessing
feelings through choice of words.

"How's it work?"

"It's really simple," she said, opening the plastic case.  She took
out a cigarette pack sized box with three knobs and a bundle of floppy
rubberized discs dangling from wires.  She plugged the wires' other ends
into the device.  "The Tens send out rapid electical signls.  We think
they blocks pain signals; we're not completely sure.  They may also
stimulate the release of endorphins -- those are the body's own pain-
killing drugs."

"So nature beat Schering-Plough, huh?"

"This goes here..." she went on without responding.  She dripped a
sticky goo from a tube onto his abdomen and firmly pressed down an elec-
trode.  "And this one here..."  again some goo, with this pad being place
on the opposite side of the incision.  "Now, tell me when you feel some-
thing."  She began to turn knobs.

Nothing..twist...nothing...twist...YIPES!

"WHOOPS!!  Sorry.  That's a little too much."

Hartley swallowed and nodded agreement; the muscle between the
electrodes had twitched violently -- and hurt.

"Just how much juice has that thing got?"

"Oh, don't let it's size fool you.  It can deliver a lot bigger
shot than that."

"Great."

"Now, I want you to turn these knobs.  This one controls the in-
tensity, and this one sets the width of the pulse.  Changing that gives
you the feeling of changing the depth of the sensation.  Play.  Go
ahead."

Hartley did and in a short time was beginning to enjoy playing with
the thing.  He settled on a particularly "warm" and "soothing" setting.

"How's that feel?"

"Very pleasant."

"And how's the abdominal pain."

Hartley felt his eyes widen.  The damned thing worked.  The linger-
ing pain that even drugs couldn't abolish was gone.  "It's gone!" he
said.

Jeannette absolutely glowed.  "Sometimes you get used to a setting,
so you may have to adjust it once in a while.  Otherwise, that's it."
Hartley thanked her as she left and went back to playing with his
new toy.  Only then did he notice that Willie had been totally absorbed
by the demonstration to the point he'd not said a word.  "This could be a
very useful thing, Willie."

"Is nothing new.  The Germans once put wires on my balls and
cranked up a field telephone."

"Oh, I'll bet that really got rid of the pain."

"Sure did.  Hurt so damn much I passed out.  Felt nothing."

Then it was Wilie's favorite time of day.  Dinner was beef vegeta-
ble soup, turkey breast and candied sweet potatoes, green beans, bread,
butter, chilled peach halves.  Hartley liked the hospital's food, found
himself in a minority, and attributed that to the other patients' lack of
experience.  Cops and reporters lost their taste buds long before their
livers.

Willie absolutely loved the hospital food and told Hartley that the
cops and reporters should have been in eastern Europe in the early 40's.
Willie often reminisced, and Hartley sometimes became engrossed in the
old man's stories.  He was fascinated mostly, though, with Willie's reac-
tions to the horrors he'd seen -- and to some he'd inflicted.  Willie,
Hartley finally concluded, had been through flames that scarred the
psyche and unlike some men who stop there, destined to wear those scars,
Willie had gone on through flames which had scoured him clean again.
Clean, but changed.  Massive suffering had given Willie rare perspective.
"When you kill a man," Willie had once advised him, the advice
being unsolicited, "you must kill quickly and cleanly.  No matter who he
is.  Even if he is butcher who should burn in hell.  Hate does not belong
with killing.  You kill quick and you kill clean -- not for the man but
because death deserves that dignity."

When Willie said it, Hartley heard "death" with a capital "D."  The only
times Hartley thought he detected tremors in Willie's monologues were when
he talked of food and hunger.  Starvation didn't offer Death the dignity it
deserved in Willie's view.

Which gave food a place of unparalleled honor in Willie's pantheon.
Which also made eating beef soup, etc. in a hospital with Willie a unique
experience for Hartley.  He enjoyed Willie's unabashed delight in every
bite of everything and found himself starting to feel the same way; for
the first time in his life he'd eaten brussels sprouts.  They still
tasted terrible, but somehow that was all right because brussel sprouts
are supposed to taste terrible.  Hartley figured another week with Willie
would forever alter his diet, cause him to kill even flies with quick
clean swipes of the swatter, and probably make his friends consider him
even stranger than they already did.

"Nurse!" one...two...three..."Nurse!" one...two...three..."Nurse!"

Whatever problem Laurie Schroeder had handled just minutes before
had been supplanted by another.

The shouting went on and on.  Hartley felt his own stomach contract
with frustrating anger.  Harris had in record time alienated every
patient and staff member on the floor.

Voices penetrated the walls.  Nurse Schroeder obviously had arrived
again.  Hartley did not envy her her job.

"Some day they're going to poison him to shut him up,"  Hartley
said.  "A fast-acting poison," he hastened to add.

"Silly silly and you a policeman.  Too easy to find."

"Not if the person who did it is the person who decides what to
look for."

"You have good police here, Hartley.  They know to look closest at
people who make decisions.  You know this."  "And how would you do it?  You
can't ice pick him in his ear in a hospital bed either."

"No....Maybe..."

Nurse Schroeder came in.

"Dinner all right?" she asked.

"This is lovely," Willie said.  "Beans very good, turkey too."

Nurse Schroeder looked doubtful and glanced at Hartley.  "He means
that for canned beans these probably were canned better than any other
beans ever and that for dry turkey there is no tastier dry turkey.  That
about right, Willie?"

"Very right.  Same for canned peaches."

"It sounds like this is starting to make sense to you, too," she
said to Hartley.

"Actually, it is.  And I've got to admit, I've had some meals in
the last few days I've enjoyed as much as any ever ate in the Four Sea-
sons."

"Your both crazy."

"I didn't say they were better, Laurie.  By comparison, the food
was terrible.  I said I enjoyed them as much.  There's a difference.
You'd really have to stay with Willie a while to get into the swing of
it."

"Oh, sure," she said, widened her eyes and threw up her hands,
"that's just what I need.  The ability to eat anything and enjoy it.
You're supposed to help me lose weight."

"Good point.  Want to give it another try later?"

"Maybe tomorrow.  Or maybe the next day.  I'll be filling in on the
overnight then.  Does Harris sleep?"  "For at least 20 minutes at a time."
"Lovely."  She turned her head toward Willie.  "We can send you in
then, Willie, and you can give him your lecture on enjoying dry turkey.
He sure could use it.  He threw it at me tonight."

"He t-h-r-e-w?"  Willie seemed to have trouble getting out the
word.  Hartley was certain it was the first time he'd ever seen surprise
on Willie's face.

"Well, one good thing about dry turkey is it doesn't stain."  She
shook her head.  Then she noticed Hartley's wires.  "You've got the Tens!
How is working?"

"I'm pleasantly surprised."

"Why?  Did you figure it like faith healing or crystal mumbo jumbo
or something?"

Hartley studied her face a moment, detected no sarcasm.  She knew
he was a hypnotist; he was thankful now he'd never told her he also sold
crystals.

"Well," he said, "it's just that the pain gets pretty intense, you
know, and it's hard to think this little nine-volt box can tackle it."

"That little nine-volt battery can get boosted to more like 90
volts, and if there was more current, you'd be singing with the angels."
Hartley looked down at the Tens with new respect.  And a little
discomfort.  "This thing dangerous?"

"No.  Not used like that.  Just don't put the electrodes where a
sudden sharp shock might screw up your vitals."

"Like where?"

"Like forget it and just put them where you're told."  Laurie
stretched; she had nice breasts, Hartley thought then immediately dis-
missed the thought.  He'd seen himself in the bathroom mirror that morn-
ing.  Surgery, mandatory washing by hand, dirty hair and flourescent
lights of precisely the right color to make a healthy person look sick
made him wonder how any nurse ever fell for any patient.

"Hartley!"

Willie's voice snapped Hartley to attention.

"Is seven o'clock.  Quick."

"Excuse me,"  Hartley said to Laurie as he began fiddling with the
hospital's aniquated TV remote control.  "There are priorities, and
Jeopardy is having its Teen Tournament."

"Nurse!  Oh, oh, oh God.  Nurse!"

Laurie's face clenched, her eyes closed.  Then she composed herself
and sid, "Time's up.  See you later.  You going to need your pain shot?"

"Not if this keeps working.  At least not right away."

She nodded and left.

"Good woman," Willie said then shut up.  Alex Trabek was introduc-
ing the quarter-finalists.

It was a crisp Autumn morning as I slowly backed out
of the driveway on my way to work.  Having spent the night
under our only tree, a gargantuan maple, my car was
heavily laden with multicolored red, yellow, and orange
leaves.

    I hadn't gone very far when I thought I noticed
something move in a strange way toward me across the car's
hood.  Not until it had surmounted my windshield did I see
that it was a big, ugly, black spider, hairy legs and all.

    I hate spiders, and right then and there I decided I
didn't need a traveling companion that had eight hairy
legs.  The spider had to go.

    In an effort to persuade it to leave, I pushed the
wiper button.  "Dope-dope dope-dope" they went, but that
fat black creature hung on tenaciously.

     "Well, if I can't shove it off," I said to myself,
"I'll wash it off."  And I pushed another button.

    The heavy spray of washer solution momentarily blurred
the entire windshield.  Some rude driver blasted his horn
as we passed.  I'd have reported him for disturbing the
peace except that I couldn't see well enough to recognize
the vehicle.

As my windshield cleared, I gaped in disbelief.  The
spider was riding behind my wiper like a water skier
behind a boat!

I quickly swerved to the left and then to the right.

I swear, that big ugly sucker looked as though it was
enjoying the ride!

"Its either him or me," I muttered and I pushed down
hard on the accelerator.  When I hit sixty, the wind blew
two of its legs out from under it.  At seventy, two more
went.  By the time I was doing eighty-five, the spider was
hanging on by only one leg.

"Just a little more and you're history!"  I shouted
triumphantly.

It was exactly then that I heard the siren.  That old
spider sat right there on my wiper and leered at me as I
waited at the side of the road for the policeman to walk
up to the car.

"Do you know how fast you were going?" he asked me as
he began writing out the ticket.


"No sir, I don't," I guiltily replied.
"Why were you speeding?"

I looked straight ahead, my mind racing for a
plausible answer.  I figured he wouldn't believe the real
reason, and a ticket is preferable to a breathalyzer test
any time.

I gasped in amazement.  The spider -my evidence- was
gone!

"Sir, are you all right?" the policeman asked.

"Ugh, yes, yes, I'm fine.  I don't know, officer. I'm
usually a very careful driver."

He handed me the ticket.  "You can either pay this at
the courthouse or you can send a check to the Department
of Motor Vehicles at the state capital.  From now on slow
down and drive carefully."

    I sat waiting as he returned to his car, feeling
foolish and muttering under my breath, "As soon as he
leaves, I'm getting the tire iron from the trunk."

    A genuine smile bloomed across my face as I watched
the policeman turn off the flashers and slowly pull out
around me.

    It's a good thing he didn't look at me as he passed,
I was laughing hysterically.

    I almost waved, at my hairy nemesis, perched there on
top of his hat.

This'll fix 'em.  Abuse me will they!  There's laws
against that stuff ya know!

    Been plannin' this for more'n a week.  Ever since I
saw this old place hidden back here off the road in the
middle of all these trees.  Saw it when they brought me
back from soccer practice.  THEY didn't see it.  THEY
don't pay any attention!

    Sure is quiet.  I hate quiet.  I'd of brought my boom
box 'cept the batteries are dead.  Its all THEIR fault!
"Buy your OWN batteries," they said.  "EARN the money,"
they said.  "Mow the lawn," they said. "Do your homework.
Clean up your room.  Take out the garbage.  Pick up your
shoes."  I'm so mad I could scream!  And its always when
my favorite shows are on!

    Sure is quiet, though.

    I'm hungry.  Missed dinner.  Had to get here before
dark and it took me TWO HOURS to ride up here on my bike.
That dumb old piece of junk.  I've had it since the
Christmas I was nine!  Two whole years!

    I'm cold, too.  I grabbed a couple of cans of stuff on
the way out but there isn't any microwave here.  No
'lectricity either.  Besides, the can opener musta fallen
outa my pocket.  That's HIS fault!  I had to get out
before HE came home from work and I'd have to listen to
"Do your homework." and "Turn off that television!" all
night.  Well they're not gonna abuse ME anymore...'cause
I'm not there!

    I'm still cold.  I brought a pack of matches so's I
could start a fire.  Had 'em in my back pocket.  Hey, it
was hard work coming all the way up here!  I got sweaty,
so what?  Darned matches got wet and now they won't work.
Dumb old bike.  I told them I wanted a new ten-speed!
Told them last week! Would they buy me one?  NOOOOO!

    What's that?

    Voices!  Somebody's shinin' lights in the window!
There's cars outside!

The Arctic. Hardly the place for a private pilot
from Southern Manitoba.
    The conditions and expenses involved in a flight
north of the arctic circle eliminate all but the very
fortunate, or the very rich.
    The high arctic has it's own mystique. Countless
reams have been written about the challenges, hard
ships, triumphs, and defeats of Arctic travellers. I
doubt if there will ever be a time which parallels the
present for entrepreneurs north of the tree line.
    As technology grows in more southern climes, so
grows the demand in the northern areas. The government
controls much of the advances in technology in the
northern communities, whether through political
maneuvering, or outright favoritism.
    Whatever the reason, the task of getting the job
done often rests on the more energetic and ambitious
businessman.
    It is to my great advantage that I am a good
friend of one of these businessmen.
    Gordon owns a plumbing and heating business in The
Pas, in Northern Manitoba. He has many contracts in the
local area, and does quite well by them. His business
is different, in that he also has contracts in the high
arctic.
    Through contracts with DPW (Department of Public
Works), he has crews in the high arctic. They are
installing plumbing and heating equipment in new
construction projects, and refurbishing older
installations.
    To some, this may seem to be a lucrative contract.
In some ways, it is. If you discount the logistic
problems involved in installing a heating system in a
school, perhaps 1000 miles from the nearest high way,
you may come to realize the complexities involved.
    Literally everything used in this project must
come in by air. Men, equipment, tools, and material.
The tools are not the simple box of wrenches required
by a mechanic. Nor the assortment of screwdrivers and
pliers of an electrician.
    The heating expert must bring in the equipment
required to convert sheet metal into ductwork. The
breaks, and rollers. The shears, hammers, formers and
other heavy tools needed to transform the sheets of
galvanized iron into a complete heating system.
    There are no suppliers up here. If an item is
forgotten in the estimate, it must be flown in. Not
from a nearby city, nor from the handy neighborhood
wholesaler. It must be brought in from the home office.
In this case, a flight of over 1000 miles.
    To explain my involvement in this, let me explain
the situation.
    My logbook reflects that I had moved, with my
family, from Gillam, a more remote community, to The
Pas, on October 7th, 1977.
    With the unfathomable reasoning with which all
bankers seem to be born, my local branch manager
informed me that I would either have to sell my
airplane, or live in it. I was trying to arrange a
mortgage at the time.
    I sold my "creampuff" 1954 Cessna 170B, complete
with the expensive 180 HP. conversion we had done the
year before. We bought a house. After which my
allseeing bank manager told me I could buy another
airplane, "If I wished."
    I wished, for another 2 years, but that is another
story.
    Actually, that other story leads right into this
one. To keep it brief, I had bought and restored
another airplane, a 1947 Stinson 108 3, I had done the
restoration in Gordon's hangar. We came to know each
other rather well.
    In April of 1982, Gordon phoned me with an offer.
    The auto pilot in his twin engine Beech Travelair
had packed up. He had to make a trip to the arctic to
carry supplies, and check on the progress of his men on
a school project.
    You can imagine my surprise when Gord called me to
go with him as second pilot, all expenses paid.
    As it happened, I was scheduled for a four day
weekend from my own job. I phoned my foreman, just in
case, and told him I was going up to the Arctic for a
few days.
    April 9, 1982. Gordon and I, a full load of fuel,
plumbing equipment, and survival gear, headed north.
    We stopped at Lynne Lake, Churchill, and Baker
Lake for fuel. In early afternoon we arrived at Gjoa
Haven, a small Eskimo hamlet on King William Island. We
were more than 100 miles north of the Arctic Circle.
    To be this far north was one thing, to have flown
it was something else.
    Gordon had been up here many times before. He read
a playboy magazine while I flew the aircraft.
    This wouldn't normally present a problem, except
that the directional gyro was on his side of the panel.
Each time I did an instrument scan, I had to lift his
book to see the guages.
    Now you might ask, what is a VFR private pilot
doing on instruments, north of the Arctic Circle? I may
have asked myself the same question. I had done a bit
of instrument flight, and Gord had a rating. All I was
doing was holding altitude and course.
    I didn't have much choice. After our trip, I was
asked to explain what it was like to fly the arctic in
winter.
    The only way I can summarize the flight is like
this: Assume you are standing at the center of the 50
yard line of a football stadium. The sky, the
sidelines, and the seating area are all painted sky
blue. The playing field is all snow white, and you are
1/4 inch high. That is what it is like to fly VFR in
the winter Arctic.
    There is absolutely nothing to relate to. The
horizon is obscured by ice fog, the sky above is clear
blue. The land below is a continuous stretch of
featureless white snow.
    During the flight to Gjoa Haven, I was curious.
Would we see any Musk Ox, or Caribou? I kept looking
over the side, hoping to see some wildlife.
    Between looking for animals, and flying the twin,
I began to get a bit queasy. I asked Gord to take
control as I swung the yoke over to his side.
    "I noticed you were getting erratic about 20
minutes ago." he said. "I thought I would leave it to
you for a while."
    I think that was the greatest compliment I have
ever received on my flying. Here we were, about to
cross the arctic circle, and Gord is waiting to see if
I could handle it.
    I must admit, if I had been alone, the results
would have been disastrous. I had vertigo so bad I
wasn't sure if we were right side up.
    Gord took control and continued the flight. I
concentrated on the artificial horizon, trying to
reestablish a reference point for my equilibrium. There
was no use looking out the window, there was nothing
but ice, snow, and blue sky.
    I relaxed for an hour, at first concentrating on
the gyro horizon, reestablishing where "up" was. I read
Gord's book for a while, then did some dead reckoning
computations to estimate our location. We were about
one hour out of Gjoa Haven when I resumed control of
the airplane.
    At last we began to receive the faint signal from
the Gjoa Haven beacon. We were within a few degrees of
our proper course. We had been flying by dead reckoning
for an hour. The beacon at Baker Lake only serving us
long enough to establish our drift corrections.
    Our calculations indicated we should soon see King
William Island, on which Gjoa Haven is located.
    The view was the same in all directions, I asked
Gord to take over control, I wanted to take some
pictures.
    I tried to focus the camera, there was nothing to
focus on except the wingtip. I set the lens at infinity
and took shots straight ahead, downward, and to either
side.
    Again I found myself looking for wildlife, to no
avail.
    Have you ever asked a person where they were going
and had them reply: "Nowhere"?
    Now I knew where "nowhere" was. There is no sense
of movement, the unbroken expanse of ice and snow
stretches to all horizons. I felt as though I was
hanging on a string. The slight oscillations of the
aircraft, and the reading on the airspeed indicator,
had to be coupled to the drone of the engines to
believe we were moving.
    The only time I could actually see anything below
was when we flew along the coast of Hudson's Bay. The
tidal action of the bay waters caused ridges in the ice
along the shore.
    I was scanning the white nothingness in front of
us. Straining to find the tiny hamlet. At last I saw
some black specks, slightly to our left, about 10 miles
distant. Gordon agreed.
    Throttling back, he began the descent. The landing
strip is located about a mile from the village. I
searched for the airport, nothing but black spots, a
sharp contrast after five hours of pure white.
    Suddenly, Gord applied power and pulled up into a
climb. "That's not Gjoa Haven," he shouted.
    He was right. I could see now that we had been set
up for a straight in approach to a pile of rocks on the
west end of the island. Gjoa Haven was a few miles
farther on. If I had not spotted the rocks, Gord would
have continued the approach to the beacon.
    Our fuel stop at Baker Lake had been incredibly
cold. The wind gave a chill factor equivalent to nearly
100 degrees below zero.  I dreaded the thought of
leaving the aircraft again.  We were now 350 miles
farther north, it would be even colder.
    I was pleasantly surprised. It was 15 degrees
warmer, and the winds were calm. A balmy twenty five
degrees below zero, Fahrenheit.
    We hitched a ride to the village in an old truck.
The buildings seemed to be scattered at random around
what appeared to be the shoreline.
    Sled dogs were tied up everywhere. Their incessant
barking followed us as we walked to the school. The law
of the land requires the dogs to be tied at all times.
A dog on the loose may be shot on sight. I could see
part of the reason.
    Most of the houses had boxes of Caribou meat
sitting outside. The hides of the animals were draped
over railings. The dogs seemed vicious. If they were
loose, I assure you, I would not walk the village
unarmed. I have no doubt they would devour all the meat
in sight. The thought of a fight between these large,
muscular, animals raises thoughts of the jungle.
    We had lunch in a crude, sectioned off portion of
what appeared to be an old warehouse. The homecooked
meal, though plain, was excellent.
    We walked over to the school, the subject of
Gordon's contract.
    It is a new building, several classrooms and a
gymnasium. The latter could have been in a modern
school in a major city. The floor is sprung in the
modern way, in that it gives underfoot, then springs
back.
    The classrooms are equally bright and cheery,
equipped with all modern conveniences and teaching
aids.
    The school is built on stilts, several feet above
the ground. The purpose is to prevent the heat of the
building penetrating the soil, thus melting the
permafrost. Once the permanent frost melted, the
building would lose its solid foundation. It would sink
into the deep moss of the tundra.
    We inspected the battery of ten furnaces, seven of
them designed to heat the school in even the severest
arctic conditions. Four of these could keep the
building reasonably warm, three were backup systems.
    Having unloaded and delivered the needed supplies
and equipment, the aircraft was ready for the trip
home.
    On our return flight, we duplicated the fuel stop
at Baker lake. Gordon went over to the Meteorological
office to check the weather. I was left to fuel the
aircraft.
    No full service here. If you want fuel, pump it
yourself!
    The fuel "office" is a long narrow building which
was, at one time, a mobile home.  There is no heat, and
the doors do not close.
    I dragged the heavy hose to the aircraft,
connected the grounding wire, and began the refueling.
I was wearing a heavy skidoo suit and a down filled
parka. The hood was pulled up and the "schnorkel" was
pulled out in front of my face. I wore heavy wool mitts
encased in leather shells.
    The wind was out of the north at 25 MPH. the
temperature was minus 35 degrees Fahrenheit.
    The Beech has 4 fuel tanks, 2 per wing. It seemed
to take hours to fill each tank. The wind cut through
my clothing. First my feet began to get cold, then my
knees. I had to open the "schnorkel" hood in order to
peer into the tank. The wind felt like a hot knife on
my face. I turned away for relief.
    At that moment, the tank over flowed. The
supercold fuel ran off the wing, onto my leg. The pain
was excruciating. My mitts were soaked with the stuff.
I should have quit and ran to shelter.
    I continued the process, topping up each of the
four tanks. I pulled the hose back to the fuel shed,
leaving just enough room to taxi the aircraft.
    By now my feet, legs, and hands were numb. My face
burned from the vicious wind. I ran to the fueling
office, expecting some heat.
    The door was partially open, blocked by a
snowdrift. I shouldered the door. My 220 pounds forced
it open. Entering the building, I found the snowdrift
extended nearly 20 feet inside, tapering to nothing
from it's initial depth of nearly three feet.
    It was cold in the building, but I was out of the
mankilling wind. I stamped my feet and swung my arms, I
had to get some circulation going. Removing my mitts, I
unzipped my parka and snow suit, placing my hands in my
armpits.
    I was still doing my dance routine when Gordon
returned.
    "I'll start the engines and get the heat on, then
you come out." He shouted, above the howl of the wind.
    The Beechcraft has a fuel burning heater in the
nose compartment. I had complained on the way up that
it was too warm. I certainly felt different now.
    I had my boots and mitts off, soaking up the heat
as Gord taxied for departure. As he turned onto the
runway I turned to him, saying, "Now I know why you
brought me along."
    He laughed and replied, "Sure. I'm getting too old
for that nonsense."
    An hour out of Baker Lake I was again at the
controls. I wanted something to do to take my mind from
the pain of chilblains.
    Once again we were in the area between beacons. We
had left Baker Lkae behind and could not yet hear
Churchill on the ADF.
    An inner sense seemed to tell me we were off
course. The directional gyro seemed to be indicating a
turn. I tried to correct it. Suddenly, I realized the
gyro was precessing! I used the turn and bank, along
with the gyro horizon, to return to straight and level
flight.
    Gord, slumbering in the left seat, woke with a
start. "What's up?" He asked.
    I was trying to reset the instrument. "We lost the
gyro," I replied. "It just started to precess, I'm off
course, and still nothing on the ADF."
    I was getting nervous! We were midway between the
only two airports! No ADF, no VOR, and now no gyro. Map
reading was out of the question. No identifiable
terrain.
    Gordon took his note book from his map case. He
did a computation based on our last known Latitude, the
time in GMT, added a number and multiplied.
    "Fly straight into the sun!" he commanded.
    I did as I was told, holding a steady course
straight at the fiery globe.
    Gord reached over and reset the D.G. The error had
been nearly 100 degrees.
    "Now resume your original heading, we should be
very close." He stowed the book and began scanning the
frequencies on the ADF.
    I thought about his procedure, it made sense.
Later I asked him for the formula, it might come in
handy to me some day.
    We flew on in silence. I concentrated on the
instruments, while Gord alternated between dead
reckoning and the ADF.
    At last we began to receive the Churchill beacon.
Weak and varying at first, it slowly increased until we
had a dependable reading. We were less than three
degrees off course. The formula had worked!
    We landed in Churchill, fueled, and had coffee
from the vending machine. After a stretch, and a visit
to the men's room, we continued our journey.
    We were, of course, below the tree line in a few
moments. This definite line, the sudden transition from
no trees to a solid spruce forest is always a welcome
sight.
    I was back in my own element now. In the company
helicopter, and in my Cessna, I had flown more than a
thousand hours in this region. At last I had a
reference besides the instruments. I relaxed.
     Soon we could see the flashing strobe lights on
the smelter stack towering 500 feet above the mill at
Thompson. Beyond the flashing strobes we soon saw the
lights of Snow Lake. Minutes later,  the smelter stack
of Flin Flon appeared off our right wing.
    I tuned the VOR receiver to The Pas. The welcome
Morse identifier "Y Q D" welcomed us. Gordon gave no
indication of assuming control for the landing. He
normally handled this part of the flying.
    I throttled back and adjusted pitch for a gradual
descent, straight in to the long concrete runway. We
touched down, with a thud, and taxied in.
    We normally operated from the short gravel strip
at the flying club beside Grace Lake. We had departed
from here as we were at maximum gross weight and needed
the extra runway.
    Gordon gave me the keys to the truck, which I
drove the 20 miles to town. He flew the Beech.
    It had been a great trip. A real memorable
experience.
    You can imagine my response when he asked me to
accompany him on another trip.
    This time is was in warmer conditions.  We left
The Pas on the warm, sunny morning of September 17th,
1982.
    We retraced our route of the previous winter. The
snow had not yet arrived. It was a completely different
trip. Once north of the tree line, the hundreds of
thousands of small lakes and ponds were evident.
Looking behind, I could see the sun reflect from their
surfaces. There seemed to be more water than land. I
could fly visually, enjoying the scenery, bleak as it
was.
    Gordon had successfully bid on a contract for the
new air terminal at Baker Lake. The structure I had
used for shelter the previous winter was being
replaced.
    It seemed someone had kept the names and changed
the location. The contrast between seasons was
incredible.
    Lakes, rivers, and trails across the tundra. Some
of these trails were over 100 years old. The more
recent tracks of vehicles scarred the surface.
    The mosses of the tundra, having such a short
growth period each summer, take decades to repair the
    damage caused by the passage of one vehicle. The tracks
below, stretching to the horizon could have been 50
years old. Or, they could have been made yesterday.
Occasional rocky outcrops and scattered willow bushes
broke the monotony of the scene.
    Four hours from The Pas we were on approach to
Baker Lake. Now I could see the lake. On our previous
trip it had been undiscernible from the surrounding
landscape.  It had appeared as a large flat, snow
covered plain.
    Now it was a beautiful lake, wind blown waves
sparkled in the noon day sun.
    As we taxied to the terminal site, Gordon spoke,
"I want you to take a walk, take your camera, and walk
the town. The beach area extends for about a mile. I
won't tell you what to look for. Just have a look
around. I'll be busy here for about two hours."
    I hitched a ride into the village, about 2 miles
distant.
    The houses seemed to be scattered haphazardly
about. Behind most homes were old refrigerators,
stoves, and washing machines.
    I laughed aloud, "Who said you couldn't sell an
icebox to an Eskimo."
    The Iglu Hotel is a modern structure. It's high
peaked roof, and rounded rafters are similar to a
Quonset hut, except higher and sharper. A small
convenience store is located off the hotel lobby.
Eskimo children are waiting in line for slices of
Pizza, warming in the microwave. They each clutch
several twenty dollar bills.
    Beside the hotel is a pile of talc, or soapstone
as it is known. The rock is flown in from Quebec for
the natives to fashion into "authentic carvings." Very
few of the carvings sold in the south are made from
local material, it is of an inferior grade. I made a
mental note to take a piece home with me. I would like
to try my wood carving skills on soapstone.
    Walking through the village I arrived at the
lakeshore. The natives had divided the waterfront in a
system that allows each person about 20 feet for his
equipment.  Boats, canoes, motors, snow machines and
caribou hides lay scattered along the gravel shore.
    Gordon had once mentioned the waste incurred in
the Arctic. Now, even seeing it, I couldn't believe it.
    I stood at one point and studied the surroundings.
Like a tracker of the old west I could read the story.
    A fisherman had hit a rock. The lower section of
the 9.9 horse power Mercury had been damaged.  The
bottom end of the motor was disassembled. The wrenches,
sockets, and ratchet used to tear down the motor were
still there. Rusting on the beach.  Beside the pile of
pieces was a boat with a new motor on the transom.
Obviously, it was easier to get a new outboard, than to
fix the old one.
    This was just the beginning of my educational
tour. There were dozens of similar sights.
    Outboards, snowmachines, and fishing nets littered
the entire beach. Damaged boats and canoes were pulled
away from the water, making room for their successors.
High powered rifles; Winchesters, Remingtons, and old
Mausers lay in the boats and on the rocks. Oil cans,
fuel drums, and fish boxes at every step.
    Above the water line sat a huge front end loader,
one of the large tires was flat. A dump truck sits atop
a ridge of gravel. Toward the end of the beach are
thousands of empty steel drums.
    I stepped around the bow of an old freighter
canoe, its twenty foot length had hidden a treasure.
    On an old wooden sawhorse hung two antique
outboard motors. I had seen similar models in museums
and boat shows. An old Evinrude single cylinder, its
cast fuel tank crusted with the corrosion of many idle
years. The second one was unfamiliar. It's shape
similar to the Evinrude with a different tank
arrangement. These motors had to be at least 40 years
old. I wondered if I could find the owners and take
them with me.
    I happened upon a strange machine, it had a
gasoline engine, a hydraulic pump, and a series of
hydraulic cylinders. The cylinders were connected to a
type of flat ram, and two large pointed contraptions.
The shape of the latter reminded me of the steel broad
head arrow points used for big game hunting.
    Gord later explained the purpose of the machine.
    There are steel drums stacked in many places
throughout the arctic. The numbers may well run into
the millions. They have been brought in by exploration
crews, bush pilots, and the military.
    The construction of the DEW line radar system
required tremendous amounts of fuel and other liquids.
The barrels remain.
    A project to salvage the barrels was proposed.
Funded by a government grant, this machine was
designed, built, and moved north.
    The idea was to salvage the steel. A barrel was
placed in the machine. The large arrowheads were forced
into each end, producing X-shaped cuts. Next the
machine lowered a table like ram, flattening the barrel
to a fraction of it's size.
    There is a fortune in salvageable steel in the
Arctic. I said "is" because it is still there.
    Pilots, refuelling from barrels, normally adjust
the pump to leave several inches of fuel behind. This
reduces the possibility of fuel contamination from
dirt, water, or rust. As a result, nearly all the drums
have liquid in them; avgas, motor oil, kerosene,
antifreeze, diesel fuel, alcohol, and more. Any
conceivable liquid that could be shipped in barrels can
likely be found in these repositories. This was the
problem that spelled the end of the project.
    Environmentalists, seeing the streams of fuel and
chemicals running into the sea, stopped the process.
    The salvage crews thought of emptying partial
barrels into selected drums to avoid spillage. Too
labour intensive.
    They thought of pumping the residuals into a ship,
anchored offshore. The various liquids were worthless,
possibly dangerous if mixed. The ship didn't have
enough tanks to keep them separate.
    Result? The drums are still there, rusting away.
Eventually they will begin to leak. When they do, they
will be too fragile to move...  Hundreds of thousands
of gallons of hazardous waste will flow into our arctic
seas, causing untold damage to our marine and wildlife.
    I asked Gord about the great pile of curved steel
plates I had seen near the beach. He told me another
little known story.
    Apparently, the territorial government decided to
install a huge fuel tank to eliminate the use of
barrels. Fuel oil would be pumped ashore from tankers
during the annual resupply trips.
    The contract was let. The tank was prefabricated
in Quebec. It was shipped down the St.Lawrence River,
up the Atlantic coast, into Hudson's Bay, and upriver
to Baker Lake.
    By the time it arrived, the territorial building
code had been changed. The tank no longer met the
requirements of the code! There it sits, just as it was
unloaded.
    I had three rolls of 35MM film with me. I exposed
all of it, 105 pictures. I still did not capture
everything there was to see. I marvelled at the waste.
As a taxpayer I was angry. Millions upon millions of
dollars, wasted.
    I was told of a government decision to replace all
the oil burning furnaces. They merely required
servicing, or minor repairs.
    Stories of misuse by government officials are
legion. Someday the media will do an expose'. Perhaps
this story will trigger some action.
    I returned to the airport. We were to remain for
two more days. I helped the crew with plumbing and
heating work, learning a bit about the vacuum sanitary
system.
    Treatment of fresh water, and disposal of waste is
a major problem. In order to reduce the load on the
facilities, the amount of water used is reduced
drastically by the use of a vacuum system.
    You can imagine my surprise when, after using a
toilet, I heard a roar like freight train. The sewage
system uses the force of a vacuum instead of water to
carry away waste.
    The main storage tank was located at one end of
the hotel, our room was at the opposite end. A vacuum
is maintained in the tank by the use of pumps. The
toilets resemble those found in railroad cars. When the
valve is tripped, there is a great roar as the contents
of the bowl are sucked downward and along a pipe. I
swear I could hear the contents of the bowl smack
against the inside of the distant tank. It may be
efficient, but it sure is noisy.
    This is the type of technology one would expect to
find on a space station. But then, the arctic is about
as close as you can get to outer space with out leaving
the ground.
    I had hoped to spend a day fishing but the high
winds created hazardous conditions on the lake. The
Arctic Char will have to wait until my next trip.
    September 19, 1982, 9:00 AM. Airborne again,
flight planned to The Pas. We would be 4.2 hours
enroute.
    From 10,000 feet, the tundra stretched to the
horizon in all directions. The mottled brown and green
speckled with reflections of sunlight from millions of
lakes and ponds. A sight witnessed by too few
Canadians.



