April is the cruellest month, breeding
Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing
Memory and desire, stirring
Dull roots with spring rain.
Winter kept us warm, covering
Earth in forgetful snow, feeding
A little life with dried tubers.
Summer surprised us, coming over the
With a shower of rain; we stopped in the colonnade,
And went on in sunlight, into the Hofgarten,
And drank coffee, and talked for an hour.

And when we were children, staying at the archduke's,
My cousin's, he took me out on a sled,
And I was frightened. He said,
hold on tight. And down we went.
In the mountains, there you feel free.
I read, much of the night, and go south in the winter.

What are the roots that clutch, what branches grow
Out of this stony rubbish? Son of man,
You cannot say, or guess, for you know only
A heap of broken images, where the sun beats,
And the dead tree gives no shelter, the cricket no relief,
And the dry stone no sound of water. Only
There is shadow under this red rock,
(Come in under the shadow of this red rock),
And I will show you something different from either
Your shadow at morning striding behind you
Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you;
I will show you fear in a handful of dust.

"You gave me hyacinths first a year ago;
"They called me the  girl."
—Yet when we came back, late, from the garden,
Your arms full, and your hair wet, I could not
Speak, and my eyes failed, I was neither
Living nor dead, and I knew nothing,
Looking into the heart of light, the silence.


Had a bad cold, nevertheless
Is known to be the wisest woman in
With a wicked pack of cards. Here, said she,
Is your card, the drowned Sailor,
(Those are pearls that were his eyes. Look!)
Here is  the Lady of the Rocks,
The lady of situations.
Here is the man with three staves, and here the Wheel,
And here is the one-eyed merchant, and this card,
Which is blank, is something he carries on his back,
Which I am forbidden to see. I do not find
The Hanged Man. Fear death by water.
I see crowds of people, walking round in a ring.
Thank you. If you see dear
Tell her I bring the horoscope myself:
One must be so careful these days.

Unreal City,
Under the brown fog of a winter dawn,
A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many,
I had not thought death had undone so many.
Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,
And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.
Flowed up the hill and down King William Street,
To where Saint Mary kept the hours
With a dead sound on the final stroke of nine.
There I saw one I knew, and stopped him, crying
"You who were with me in the ships at
"That corpse you planted last year in your garden,
"Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?
"Or has the sudden frost disturbed its bed?
"Oh keep the Dog far hence, that's friend to men,
"Or with his nails he'll dig it up again!



The Chair she sat in, like a burnished throne,
Glowed on the marble, where the glass
Held up by standards wrought with fruited vines
From which a golden peeped out
(Another hid his eyes behind his wing)
Doubled the flames of sevenbranched candelabra
Reflecting light upon the table as
The glitter of her jewels rose to meet it,
From satin cases poured in rich profusion.
In vials of ivory and coloured glass
Unstoppered, lurked her strange synthetic perfumes,
 powdered, or liquid—troubled, confused
And drowned the sense in odours; stirred by the air
That freshened from the window, these ascended
In fattening the prolonged candle-flames,
Flung their smoke into the
Stirring the pattern on the coffered ceiling.
Huge sea-wood fed with copper
Burned green and orange, framed by the coloured stone,
In which sad light a dolphin swam.
Above the antique mantel was displayed
As though a window gave upon the sylvan scene
The change of P by the barbarous king
So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale
Filled all the desert with inviolable voice
And still she cried, and still the world pursues,
"Jug Jug" to dirty ears.
And other withered stumps of time
Were told upon the walls; staring forms
Leaned out, leaning, hushing the room enclosed.
Footsteps shuffled on the stair.
Under the firelight, under the brush, her hair
Spread out in fiery points
Glowed into words, then would be savagely still.

"My nerves are bad to-night. Yes, bad. Stay with me.
"Speak to me. Why do you never speak. Speak.
"What are you thinking of? What thinking? What?
"I never know what you are thinking. Think."

I think we are in rats' alley
Where the dead men lost their bones.

"What is that noise?"
                             The wind under the door.
"What is that noise now? What is the wind doing?"
                             Nothing again nothing.
"Do
"You know nothing? Do you see nothing? Do you remember
"Nothing?"

   I remember
Those are pearls that were his eyes.
"Are you alive, or not? Is there nothing in your head?"
But
O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag—
It's so elegant
So intelligent
"What shall I do now? What shall I do?"
I shall rush out as I am, and walk the street
"With my hair down, so. What shall we do tomorrow?
"What shall we ever do?"
                                     The hot water at ten.
And if it rains, a closed car at four.
And we shall play a game of chess,
Pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door.

When Lil's husband got demobbed, I said—
I didn't mince my words, I said to her myself,
HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
Now Albert's coming back, make yourself a bit smart.
He'll want to know what you done with that money he gave you
To get yourself some teeth. He did, I was there.
You have them all out, Lil, and get a nice set,
He said, I swear, I can't bear to look at you.
And no more can't I, I said, and think of poor Albert,
He's been in the army four years, he wants a good time,
And if you don't give it him, there's others will, I said.
Oh is there, she said. Something o' that, I said.
Then I'll know who to thank, she said, and give me a straight look.
HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
If you don't like it you can get on with it, I said.
Others can pick and choose if you can't.
But if Albert makes off, it won't be for lack of telling.
You ought to be ashamed, I said, to look so antique.
(And her only thirty-one.)
I can't help it, she said, pulling a long face,
It's them pills I took, to bring it off, she said.
(She's had five already, and nearly died of young George.)
The chemist said it would be all right, but I've never been the same.
You are a proper fool, I said.
Well, if Albert won't leave you alone, there it is, I said,
What you get married for if you don't want children?
HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
Well, that Sunday Albert was home, they had a hot gammon,
And they asked me in to dinner, to get the beauty of it hot—
HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
Goonight Bill. Goonight Lou. Goonight May. Goonight.
Ta ta. Goonight. Goonight.
Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night.

The river's tent is broken: the last fingers of leaf
Clutch and sink into the wet bank. The wind
Crosses the brown land, unheard. The nymphs are departed.
Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.
The river bears no empty bottles, sandwich papers,
Silk handkerchiefs, cardboard boxes, cigarette ends
Or other testimony of summer nights. The nymphs are departed.
And their friends, the loitering heirs of city directors;
Departed, have left no addresses.
By the waters of Leman I sat down and wept . . .
Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song,
Sweet Thames, run softly, for I speak not loud or long.
But at my back in a cold blast I hear
The rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear.
A rat crept softly through the vegetation
Dragging its slimy belly on the bank
While I was fishing in the dull canal
On a winter evening round behind the gashouse
Musing upon the king my brother's wreck
And on the king my father's death before him.
White bodies naked on the low damp ground
And bones cast in a little low dry garret,
Rattled by the rat's foot only, year to year.
But at my back from time to time I hear
The sound of horns and motors, which shall bring
Sweeney to Mrs. Porter in the spring.
O the moon shone bright on Mrs. Porter
And on her daughter
They wash their feet in soda water
Et O ces voix d'enfants, chantant dans la coupole!

Twit twit twit
Jug jug jug jug jug jug
So rudely forc'd.
Tereu

Unreal City
Under the brown fog of a winter noon
Mr. Eugenides, the Smyrna merchant
Unshaven, with a pocket full of currants
C.i.f. London: documents at sight,
Asked me in demotic French
To luncheon at the Cannon Street Hotel
Followed by a weekend at the Metropole.

At the violet hour, when the eyes and back
Turn upward from the desk, when the human engine waits
Like a taxi throbbing waiting,
I Tiresias, though blind, throbbing between two lives,
Old man with wrinkled female breasts, can see
At the violet hour, the evening hour that strives
Homeward, and brings the sailor home from sea,
The typist home at teatime, clears her breakfast, lights
Her stove, and lays out food in tins.
Out of the window perilously spread
Her drying combinations touched by the sun's last rays,
On the divan are piled (at night her bed)
Stockings, slippers, camisoles, and stays.
I Tiresias, old man with wrinkled dugs
Perceived the scene, and foretold the rest—
I too awaited the expected guest.
He, the young man carbuncular, arrives,
A small house agent's clerk, with one bold stare,
One of the low on whom assurance sits
As a silk hat on a Bradford millionaire.
The time is now propitious, as he guesses,
The meal is ended, she is bored and tired,
Endeavours to engage her in caresses
Which still are unreproved, if undesired.
Flushed and decided, he assaults at once;
Exploring hands encounter no defence;
His vanity requires no response,
And makes a welcome of indifference.
(And I Tiresias have foresuffered all
Enacted on this same divan or bed;
I who have sat by Thebes below the wall
And walked among the lowest of the dead.)
Bestows one final patronising kiss,
And gropes his way, finding the stairs unlit . . .

She turns and looks a moment in the glass,
Hardly aware of her departed lover;
Her brain allows one half-formed thought to pass:
"Well now that's done: and I'm glad it's over."
When lovely woman stoops to folly and
Paces about her room again, alone,
She smooths her hair with automatic hand,
And puts a record on the gramophone.

"This music crept by me upon the waters"
And along the Strand, up Queen Victoria Street.
O City city, I can sometimes hear
Beside a public bar in Lower Thames Street,
The pleasant whining of a mandoline
And a clatter and a chatter from within
Where fishmen lounge at noon: where the walls
Of Magnus Martyr hold
Inexplicable splendour of Ionian white and gold.

The river sweats
Oil and tar
The barges drift
With the turning tide
Red sails
Wide
To leeward, swing on the heavy spar.
The barges wash
Drifting logs
Down Greenwich reach
Past the Isle of Dogs.
    Weialala leia
    Wallala leialala
Elizabeth and Leicester
Beating oars
The stern was formed
A gilded shell
Red and gold
The brisk swell
Rippled both shores
Southwest wind
Carried down stream
The peal of bells
White towers
    Weialala leia
    Wallala leialala

"Trams and dusty trees.
Highbury bore me. Richmond and Kew
Undid me. By Richmond I raised my knees
Supine on the floor of a narrow canoe."

"My feet are at Moorgate, and my heart
Under my feet. After the event
He wept. He promised 'a new start'.
I made no comment. What should I resent?"
"On Margate Sands.
I can connect
Nothing with nothing.
The broken fingernails of dirty hands.
My people humble people who expect
Nothing."
     la la

To Carthage then I came

Burning burning burning burning
O Lord Thou pluckest me out
O Lord Thou pluckest me out

Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead,
Forgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell
And the profit and loss.
                                         A current under sea
Picked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell
He passed the stages of his age and youth
Entering the whirlpool.
                                       Gentile or Jew
O you who turn the wheel and look to windward,
Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.

After the torchlight red on sweaty faces
After the frosty silence in the gardens
After the agony in stony places
The shouting and the crying
Prison and palace and reverberation
Of thunder of spring over distant mountains
He who was living is now dead
We who were living are now dying
With a little patience

Here is no water but only rock
Rock and no water and the sandy road
The road winding above among the mountains
Which are mountains of rock without water
If there were water we should stop and drink
Amongst the rock one cannot stop or think
Sweat is dry and feet are in the sand
If there were only water amongst the rock
Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit
Here one can neither stand nor lie nor sit
There is not even silence in the mountains
But dry sterile thunder without rain
There is not even solitude in the mountains
But red sullen faces sneer and snarl
From doors of mudcracked houses
If there were water
And no rock
If there were rock
And also water
And water
A spring
A pool among the rock
If there were the sound of water only
Not the cicada
And dry grass singing
But sound of water over a rock
Where the hermit-thrush sings in the pine trees
Drip drop drip drop drop drop drop
But there is no water

Who is the third who walks always beside you?
When I count, there are only you and I together
But when I look ahead up the white road
There is always another one walking beside you
Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded
I do not know whether a man or a woman
—But who is that on the other side of you?

What is that sound high in the air
Murmur of maternal lamentation
Who are those hooded hordes swarming
Over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth
Ringed by the flat horizon only
What is the city over the mountains
Cracks and reforms and bursts in the violet air
Falling towers
Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
Vienna London
Unreal

A woman drew her long black hair out tight
And fiddled whisper music on those strings
And bats with baby faces in the violet light
Whistled, and beat their wings
And crawled head downward down a blackened wall
And upside down in air were towers
Tolling reminiscent bells, that kept the hours
And voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted wells.

In this decayed hole among the mountains
In the faint moonlight, the grass is singing
Over the tumbled graves, about the chapel
There is the empty chapel, only the wind's home.
It has no windows, and the door swings,
Dry bones can harm no one.
Only a cock stood on the rooftree
Co co rico co co rico
In a flash of lightning. Then a damp gust
Bringing rain

Ganga was sunken, and the limp leaves
Waited for rain, while the black clouds
Gathered far distant, over Himavant.
The jungle crouched, humped in silence.
Then spoke the thunder
DA
Datta: what have we given?
My friend, blood shaking my heart
The awful daring of a moment's surrender
Which an age of prudence can never retract
By this, and this only, we have existed
Which is not to be found in our obituaries
Or in memories draped by the beneficent spider
Or under seals broken by the lean solicitor
In our empty rooms
DA
Dayadhvam: I have heard the key
Turn in the door once and turn once only
We think of the key, each in his prison
Thinking of the key, each confirms a prison
Only at nightfall, aetherial rumours
Revive for a moment a broken Coriolanus
DA
Damyata: The boat responded
Gaily, to the hand expert with sail and oar
The sea was calm, your heart would have responded
Gaily, when invited, beating obedient
To controlling hands

                                     I sat upon the shore
Fishing, with the arid plain behind me
Shall I at least set my lands in order?
London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down
Poi s'ascose nel foco che gli affina
Quando fiam ceu chelidon— O swallow swallow
These fragments I have shored against my ruins
Why then Ile fit you. Hieronymo's mad againe.
Datta. Dayadhvam. Damyata.

Say, what is the spell, when her fledgelings are chee[ping,
     That lures the bird home to her nest?
Or wakes the tired mother, whose infant is weeping,
     To cuddle and croon it to rest?
What the magic that charms the glad babe in her arms,
     Till it cooes with the voice of the dove?
'Tis a secret, and so let us whisper it low-
     And the name of the secret is Love!
          For I think it is Love,
          For I feel it is Love,
     For I'm sure it is nothing but Love!

Say, whence is the voice that, when anger is burning,
     Bids the whirl of the tempest to cease?
That stirs the vexed soul with an aching- a yearning
     For the brotherly hand-grip of peace?
Whence the music that fills all our being- that thrills
     Around us, beneath, and above?
'Tis a secret: none knows how it comes, how it goes-
     But the name of the secret is Love!
          For I think it is Love,
For I feel it is Love,
     For I'm sure it is nothing but Love!

Say, whose is the skill that paints valley and hill,
     Like a picture so fair to the sight?
That flecks the green meadow with sunshine and shadow,
     Till the little lamb leap with delight?
'Tis a secret untold to hearts cruel and cold,
     Though 'tis sung, by the angels above,
In notes that ring clear for the ears that can hear-
     And the name of the secret is Love!
          For I think it is Love,
          For I feel it is Love,
     For I'm sure it is nothing but Love!

Broken hearts and shattered dreams
Happens to me a lot it seems
An endless cycle of despair
It seems no one really cares
Sometimes.

A closed heart, it seems to be
Is my only defense from me
When I open up some more
The world quickly slams the door
Hurting.

We've known each other for a while
Now it will hurt when I see your smile
For I thought I knew you fairly well
But now I'm trapped in my lonely hell
Dying.

You know that we will stay friends
For true friendships have no ends
I made my heart as clear as glass
Now the hurt inside me will pass
Slowly.......

I'm over the pain, but not completely
The fire smoulders and my heart beats weakly
The haze is gone, and clear are my eyes
What I felt for you is gone from our lives
Completely.

But the effects of this event
The aftershocks I can't prevent
They will never really go away
And I will always find it hard to say
Truthfully.

Because this has happened before
It's happened so many times before
And I'll never recover from anyone
It's hard to believe that I've never won
Honestly.

I've tried before and always been hurt
So many times been made to feel like dirt
I always seem to find the one who
Will always, without fail, say no
Destroying.

And now that it's over, now that it's done
I hope that someday I will find the one
That won't say no, that won't turn away
That will actually want me to say
"I love you."

'Tis a grand old tradition,
the fisherman's tale.
It's begun over coffee
and  enlarged with ale
As the brandy is passed
the meek become hale
And by midnight
The damned thing's turned into a whale.

To sit at the feet of a fishman
one must be very still
To learn the art of the angler
one must learn to kill

The silver trout may teach us
to use an artful lure
The muddy cat will show us
humility for sure

A blue gill gives us laughter
on sunlit morning stream
But the bass, o' flying swimmer
Fulfills our greatest dream

For money in the hand of man
Must soon be spent in game
Besides, fishing is safer
Our gilled friends are tame!


Time loops
Reality
Virtual insanity
Ahhhhhhh
Endless ecstacy

And spring is born a world away
against the coming winter grey

Space warps
Infinity
Cyber divinity
Oooooohh
What trinity?


Here it is, a quick silver creation
 In zeroes and ones.
Slipped beneath the eye of the sleeping
 whispered into the ear of the dead.
Wrenched from the heart of the bleeding
 screaming, abandoned, cowering in dread.

Get your red hot erotica, your tears frozen
 In zeros and ones.
Dashed against walls of blue indifference
 whimpering behind the secret screen
Presented by false names and lying faces
 writen by flying fingers never seen.

Step up, it's going fast, about to run out
 In zeros and ones.


Got a journal of insanity
 Got a trip log from hell
  Got a volume of results
   Got a lot crap to sell.

Got the coin to take a peek
 Got the nerve to take a ride
  Got the balls to face the music
   Got a real tough hide

 Got a time load of pain
  Got a trip wire on  oblivion
   Got a joke to tell myself tonight
    Gotta do it all again someday


 Got ribbons to tie it up
  Got bells to make it ring
   Got visions for the Lady
    Got orgasms for the King


 Got a lot of gall you silly bastard
  Got a big brass ring
   Got the world by the horns, baby
    Got a crazy bitch to sing

 Got eternity to make it balance
  Got a path for every foot
   Got a train named Blain to take you there
    Got that spaceship booked


 Got to go, I'm sleepy now
  Got a lot to learn
   Got no one to keep me warm
    Got no one to make me burn


 Got to figure out how the hell this stupid note to no one
   Got inside my head
    Got got got got no brain
     Got ripples in a 6-D dream pool, though.


Coming apart at the seams of myriad realities
Buried by what, in what?
The earth is alight, alive.
The air is pure, crisp, clean
Or dreaming of cleaning itself
The fire burns because it has fuel
Because it must cleanse itself
The water flows, creating it's own patterns.

Ah, then it *is* the fifth firth.
And half a world away the anger,
The defenses go up,
Reflections near and far.


Who will bleed so prettily for them when I am done?
Ah, of course, we breed like weeds, do we
The fools and the dreamers,
The reapers of ridicule
The bearers of burdens only we can feel.
Crushed beneath all of us
Drowning in the pretty, the petty
Drowning in the fluff...in time
In questions...of myriad realities.


In the places of healing
The colors you wear
The songs that you sing
The creeds that you bear

The tools you deploy
The halls where you walk
The aches you destroy
The diseases you stalk

The herbs you hand out
The waters you share
'Tis plain beyond doubt
It's the intent of your care


The cold garret of the artist...the
trance place of the mystic...  to
walk this place causes the body to
be forgotten, or to be the
all...depending upon the dream.

IT is a place, perhaps of shared
spirits, shared dreams, a chaotic
whirlpool of all that we have ever
been, all that we ever will be, each
and together.  Heaven and hell mean
nothing to the gypsy...she sees them
as one...in this place.  But she
wonders....and waits....and
sometimes she reaches out a finger,
to touch a whisp of this place.  She
retracts her finger, looks at it,
and points it at the places in
reality that match it.

No one listens, and that is as it
should be...but she smiles and cries
as she watches others touch the
essence of this place, and hopes
that they may give to or receive
from this place more than she has
ever been able to....


There are bells in the garden
 which tinkle in the night
Their elven whispers sing
 of green sleep's delight
 'neath a moon of silver splender
 overcast by winter's light.

And she dreams of spring

Their are reeds in the wind
 which whistle at the dawn
Their ruffled howls cry
 at the clouds gray drawn
 a morning's coverlet, frozen
 where the flowers have gone.

And she wishes for spring

There are drums 'neath the earth
 which echo at the gloaming
Their marching beat reflects
 on each cycle's roaming
 o'er day's silent wisdoms
 at the ebbtide, chill, foaming.

And she waits for spring.


The blood runs deep
and the blood runs cold
in the deep of time
where the tales are told

When that which is fey
comes into the light
there is mass confusion
from the double sight

She breathes in the night
and exhales the dawn
her tired anger stirs
at the death of the fawn.

She walks alone through
the cold grey mist
and her bosom burns
Where his lips have kissed

Tis best she sleep
Through the times of man
let him build his worlds
whilst he still can.


Lost in the dreamer's dream I soar
on the wings of words woven softly
in a twilight song.

There are no clouds so gentle as
the visions of a poet who dares
the beauty of love.

There are no winds to whipser
with tinkling bells so silven
as the voice of hope.

There is nere a fire so welcome
as the flickering arms of
solace offered by desire.

There is no sleep so sought after
as that sweet shadow built by
by the lover's caress.

Found in the dreamer's dream I swim
into the depths of time,
again in the morning's arms.


To loose the budding gift
To rise beyond the pain
Alight the Night!
Recall the day!
I no longer walk this Way.

Battlefields above the clouds
Blood below the fields
Children weep!
I hear them cry.
This path to glory's dry.

Invoke me not, mortal fool
My sister stands in pain
I know your touch
'A gift' you say ?
Ah, one I would repay.


They'll be coming now, on the night shift.
Whispering silences through a shadow's gift
Ain't no song sung brighter under the sun
Ain't no tears saved once they've begun.
Ain't no safe place, child, where you can run.

Well, I guess I'm morbid enough for a beer now....

Blinded by image's solar flares
carona haloes afire
at the world's horizons
Dreamer weaps tears
and this sea is borne

Adrift in salinic baths
of life's reserve
her varied enterpretations
Slumber sighs, turning
and the winds arise.

Drawn again, called
by bloods pulsing rythms
cycles at the surface awake
and Sleep's illusions
are Reality's masks.

Did you look into the face of the old black rose
 When you thought you'd rather die?
Did you see something there you didn't have
 Something that made you cry
For the strength to go on through the dullest day
 And the fight to stand proud in the light.

Did you gaze into the heart of the old black rose
 When you knew you'd seen it before
Did you feel something there that you'd lost somehow
 Something a part of your core
Ripped and torn by the winds of fate from a center
 Gone cold in the glare of pain.

Did you know yourself there in the old black rose
 But for the chance roll of the dice?
Did you find something there that you needed to love
 Something that shattered the ice
Of ignorance passed back and forth through the lines
 Of color and gender and time.

Did you leave something there with the old black rose
 Something you needed to give
Did you pass through the life of eternity's child
 Did you let her teach you to live
In a world filled with scattered lovers and friends
 And children who prey on your mind.

Then there on the lips of the old black rose
 Rides a smile you wish you could touch
And there in the eyes of woman ill used
 An old woman who gave you so much
Of yourself while you rocked on the porch and heard
 The hope of 'just one more visit'.


Oh, Death! Is that you
Who've at last come to rescue me
From this mediocre cursedness, inanity

Pray, what hast kept you
As I wallowed ever in this field
Toiling with tears years without yield

Love, what cloak wear you
Come closer that I may touch the thread
And cast away this life, this endless dread

Ah, tis light beyond compare
Here in your caring arms at rest at last
What?  What the hell do you mean 'relive the past'?

Death where have you fled
Now that I breathe afresh the morning dew
Ah, another long wait until I may touch you!

The difference between a blow dryer and a flame thrower?
You make the call.
Something to do with tactics...
A firm grasp of the obvious.
Another stunning victory for the uncunning,
The glass jaw of defeat.
In the international magazine shop, the proprietor plays
The World's Worst Ethnic Music, volume two.
His lucky tape.
My favorite genre of music: pointless noodling.
Or rather, Pointillist Mood Ring.
Yours too?  Whatta team!
Nobody promised us beauty--the stairway
To the apartment caked with paint the color of a toothache.
Nothing you would have tolerated in a fire escape
Half a lifetime ago.  Sorry sweetie.
Now your working life is half over and what've you got?
A chicken in every pot and not a pot to piss in
And the good taste not to waste your wishes on realism.
Saving grace that the internal life lasts longer than long:
Stars shall fall from the sky,
Ibuprofen bottles shall pop their childproof caps!
But not yet, maybe not even soon.
What fun would that be?  What challenge?
After work you hear:
"Anchor Steam is to me what spinach is to Popeye."
Ain't nobody's business if I say
Outside the Art Factory all the young painters
Owe themselves a living,
Lined up dressed in black, praying
      God I hope my grant comes through
      God I hope my grant comes through--
Money destined for names everybody already knows.
Next up, the firing squad,
A better bad movie,
A widget, a mouse-trap, a paradigm, a school.
A trend, if we're lucky.



DO WHAT YOU LOVE AND THE MONEY WILL FOLLOW, IF YOU VISUALIZE A RICH
RELATIVE (WHO LIKES YOU) DYING REAL SOON NOW


Let's talk data.
You're DBased. All sorted out. All out of sorts.
More debris from the Information Age
Scattershot rattletrap ricochet all the way home.
The usual "chew on this, buddy."
Very infotaining.
The word "networking" has aquired so many meanings
It now means everything.
So give it up, give in to it.
There's twelve steps out there somewhere
That address your particular problem.
As opposed to that dweeb over there,
Who imagines himself an information surfer in mid-dude-ism,
But in a parallel reality
He's just a guy with an ulcer for a job,
A flycasting wannabe
With a Sharper Image catalog for an imagination.
"Watch the undertow, buddy.
Watch the undertow. "
We didn't make this world, so we'll have to lie to it.
Is it resume time? We'll let you know.
News is not reported, it is released
Wicked as a spitball. Write a personals ad:
"Desperate seeking insanely desperate. Someone
Who will take me."
Upload it to the on-line service. She'll buy it.
Why not? She's a consumer.
Dinner, drinks, dancing, and maybe later,
Date-rape.
That's the way business is done. It's a career,
Not your life or anything. Now bend over.
With enough coke it can even seem like pleasure.
But don't forget to count them beans. Keep your receipts.
The city is just a conduit for business.
Plug and play. Plug away.
Spelunk your synapses for the next innovation:
Misfire or mismanagement. Rising stars go nova,
Then you're out on your ass. Resume time!
Jerk your fingers to the known. You've got connections.
Work them puppies!
So there it is:
The state of the art, the state of the states.
All wired up and nothing to know.
We'll get back to you.


A word from another age, an age of
What? Property? Propriety?
To us it's all Zagnut bars and Rice Krispies:
"First, you harvest the rice. Then..."
The new term for bus is "crack shuttle,"
And let's not get into the MicroChannel(tm)
Versus Extended Industry Standard Architecture bit, okay?
With computers, I'll take the chip
And let everything else fall where it may,
As if performance were speed and speed only.
Spinelli's espresso,
A dog so nervous, even his pecker jitters.
To work downtown, you not only have to do the job,
But be pretty enough for them, and wear the right clothes.
You have to talk the talk, and walk the talk,
A real no-brainer. Duh-on-a-stick.
Precision is greatly overrated:
I say close enough for jazz, close enough for government work.
Just round the tax I owe
Up to the nearest o-let's-say ten thousand.
Don't deal with decimals. That part of the brain is dead.
So let's mourn it now, the death of calculation.
Ten hours of silence, a nice round number.
We've got vending machines full of Zagnut bars for the engineers And
accountants, so nobody else needs to count out change.


In the desert, the boring desert the jarhead sleeps tonight.
Dream on, white boy. Wake me up when I'm over it.
Back here at home where he used to vote
All the good causes are lined up and down the street:
Feed the homeless dinner tonight, stop US militarism, stop
Prop pick a number, any number.
"I don't want to argue, I just want you to agree with me."
The perfect marriage of the Harvard School of Business MBA
And the U of Anyold MFA:
An economy based on weapons that don't work.
The usual revenge of the second rate.
We've gotta blow up some tanks so we can build more.
"Stick with me, kid, you'll go
Bankrupt."  The Savings and Loans have all closed down,
But the ATMs are everywhere. Now they've got your address,
Next they'll have you pissing in a jar.
The proof is in the putting
Out, putting down, putting off. It's always been put up and shut up
Or shut down the whole operation.
A shut off valve is needed, is blown.
A whole generation that grew up in video arcades,
And would rather shoot down aircraft
Than shoot off their mouths?  I can hardly believe that.
Between the neo-urbane musings of the pols
And the foul mouthings of the unleashed mentally ill,
The have-nots ask the almost-have-nots for change.
You don't want change.
You're one paycheck away yourself.
The work would be hilarious if it didn't kill you. No ideas but in
Excuses, if the good ones aren't all spoken for.
Between the quick and the dead and the quicker and the quicklime,
Hell, there must be hundreds of ways to turn a desert
Into glass.


Kathleen was quoting somebody when she said
     "You can't swing a dead cat by the tail in San Francisco
      Without hitting somebody with a nose ring"
And I meant to ask "Is that the law
Or just a statistical analysis?"
In the mail ten pounds of Voter Information
I don't want to read.
What do you expect in a state whose history starts out
Like a small Latin American country then turns
Into a cartoon?
The candidates don't matter.
Its all those propositions, home-brewed law.  Gotta study up.
BackEastDownSouth we used the familiar formula:
Vote and complain, vote and complain.
We're in reverse:
How much participation can we stand?
"The voters wanted it": the perfect excuse
When our pols run for elsewhere office and want to sound-byte
          less liberal.
Such individuals that rise to serve!
Why would we want to ignore them?

You can respect anything, but awe just happens.
I'm living proof I'll live through this
But what does that prove?
No end to view it from but now,
Or now
Or now...like outtasight, but hardly insight.
Might as well be the jerk
And heave of industrial parts
If you're actually gonna drink that yellow drool
Straight from the faucet.
We do not endure the city, we are it,
Bile, backwash, and look! what a view!
I can hardly believe that's us too--
The pyramid lit up, skinny sky-finger
Finger fucks the clouds,
Gives god and everybody the finger.
I'd second that, if there weren't already such a crowd,
But look what it is!
Brighter than stars!  And closer!
If we could only breathe this crap, it'd be paradise.


Whatcha gonna do when honeybunny goes Flake-O?
As Senator Don Riegle Jr. of Michigan
Once said in a tape-recorded conversation with an aide:
"I--I--God, I feel such super love for you.
By the way, the newsletter should start arriving."
No anti-bodies for this disease, no sir.
No wuss this.
"Healing wounds all times,
What you don't hurt won't know you..."
Just do the gig, okay Nancy?
The lesbian dressed biker-butch and I cruise the same
Women--too young for either of us--
Outside SF Coffee Co., the sun
On the coffee-stained sidewalk, face sides, school folding chairs.
Learn something why doncha?
"If I want your opinion, I'll beat it outta ya."
We laughed at that--in sickness, health.  Vice inverse-o.
O, we can buy books from the happiness industry,
We can pay cash money for counseling,
We can really spend some time on what's really wrong with us...
We can grow into it:
The perfect mate.
Or what the hell, just visualize it.  Nice try.  Instead it's:
"I feel such super love for you I could buy you
A mirror, cheaper than a coffin."
You send me my stuff, through friends, in a bag.
I send you your stuff.  Same bag, different friends.
On the sidewalk, on a folding chair custom designed
For a howling pain in the ass,
She sips coffee, squirms in her leathers,
Reads another page of another book on
The One True Goddess.
Burps loud.  Says "'Scuse ME."

All year, death, after death, after death.
Then today look how majestically clouds float in the sky,
God putting on a show of tenderness, nothing like thoughts
that rise and drift in my mind, like flakes shaken
in a snow globe, and my brain laboring in its own night,
never feeling the punky starlight of dark thirty, the time
a friend said for us to meet and had to explain it was half an hour
after the first dark, when daylilies fold up and headlights
lead the way home, but maybe too early
to find the moon turning half its body away,
holding it hidden like the black side of a mirror, unseen
until it breaks, unexpectedly, the way grief
breaks over you when you've already given all you've got
and hands you tools you don't know how to use.

The blush of dark thirty turned bleak
when I heard about the O—
O dark thirty, military time for 12:30 a.m.,
hour of the deepest dark, when, if I'm awake,
as I often am, a storm of thoughts battle one another, now settling
unsettlingly on the ways we make war and flaunt it.
Take the Civil War double cannon the lawn
of a city hall in the deep south, twinned so that two cannonballs
chained together kill two at a time, often decapitating.
And why did a small town, population 932, in rural New Hampshire,
import a ballistic missile to crown its village green?

Brecht's line floats up: "Pity the nation that needs heroes,"
but what to do with the guy pontificating on the Middle East,
telling me with the gravest authority—
that of stupidity—the reason for the strife there:
"Hatred is in the rocks."

Has anyone desribed the smell of wishbones drying
on the kitchen sill or the smell of glass, or the bucket of water
lifted from the well we go to when death takes the last thirst
from someone we love?

After my mother died, sometimes
I'd take the one piece of her clothing I'd kept
to bed and bury my face
in her flowered blouse to smell her last skin,
but even from the first it was futile.

What I got was the smell of goneness, the smell of screen
doors where moths have spent their wing powder
beating failingly to reach the light.

My massage therapist said she felt grief
in my body like hard empty boxes.
I felt like I was always handling dough,
never wanting the kneading to be done, never wanting
to bake the bread that meant the end of something having to do
with a mother and daughter in a kitchen.

My mother has been gone for years, and I begin to see,
in the spots on the backs of my hands, in the shelf
my cheekbones make for my cheeks, in the way I hold
my mouth against gravity's pull, that I carry her
wiht me, my skin, her skin,
her last skin.

The few strings snap and pull
the doll’s flimsy limbs for his last
ballet, an American piece, arms flung
like a flamingo’s wings, his sashay
a flame’s undulation, dip, wave, head
snapped into a skygaze, a pained grin white
beneath the doorway’s light, legs braiding
in the climactic pirouette, convulsive
shoulders rolling, the body’s final drift
smooth as a sun-baked bloodflake
flecked off a rhino’s horn, the gored
corpse sweet meat to a smoky gauze
of ravenous flies humming and blood-
sucking tiny gunpowder-singed hearts,
charred kiss marks, until, at last,
the strings go slack, the doll
sprawls in a crippled collapse, his face
half lit, the puppeteers praising this black
ghost’s steel-pierced, last dying
quake, the dead sweet and clean,
and that last wheeze, an escaping, you’ve heard
it, drops the floodgates for the real ghosts,
a bouqet of them, a blitzkrieg of black orchids
roaring. And they blaze.

It’s the shivering. When rage grows
hot as an army of red ants and forces
the mind to quiet the body, the quakes
emerge, sometimes just the knees,
but, at worst, through the hips, chest, neck
until, like a virus, slipping inside the lungs
and pulse, every ounce of strength tapped
to squeeze words from my taut lips,
his eyes scanning my car’s insides, my eyes,
my license, and as I answer the questions
3, 4, 5 times, my jaw tight as a vice,
his hand massaging the gun butt, I
imagine things I don’t want to
and inside beg this to end
before the shiver catches my
hands, and he sees,
and something happens.

If you find yourself half naked
and barefoot in the frosty grass, hearing,
again, the earth's great, sonorous moan that says
you are the air of the now and gone, that says
all you love will turn to dust,
and will meet you there, do not
raise your first. Do not raise
your small voice against it. And do not
take cover. Instead, curl your toes
into the grass, watch the cloud
ascending from your lips. Walk
through the garden's dormant splendor.
Say only, thank you.
Thank you.

Because he was 38, because this
was his second job, because
he had two daughters, because his hands
looked like my father's, because at 7
he would walk to the furniture warehouse,
unload trucks 'til 3 AM, because I
was fourteen and training him, because he made
$3.75 an hour, because he had a wife
to look in the face, because
he acted like he respected me,
because he was sick and would not call out
I didn't blink when the water
dropped from his nose
into the onion's perfectly circular
mouth on the Whopper Jr.
I coached him through preparing.
I did not blink.
Tell me this didn't happen.
I dare you.

Isn't it always the heart that wants to wash
the elephant, begging the body to do it
with soap and water, a ladder, hands,
in tree-shade big enough for the vast savannahs
of your sadness, the strangler fig of your guilt,
the cratered full moon's light fueling
the windy spooling memory of elephant?

What if Father Quinn had said, "Of course you'll recognize
your parents in heaven," instead of
"Being one with God will make your mother and father
pointless." That was back when I was young enough
to love them absolutely though still fear for their place
in heaven, imagining their souls like sponges full
of something resembling street water after rain.

Still my mother sent me every Saturday to confess,
to wring the sins out of my small baffled soul, and I made up lies
about lying, disobeying, chewing gum in church, to offer them
as carefully as I handed over the knotted handkercheif of coins
to the grocer when my mother sent me for a loaf of Wonder,
Land O'Lakes, and two Camels.

If guilt is the damage of childhood, then eros is the fall of adolescence.
Of the fall begins there, and never ends, desire after desire parading
through a lifetime like the Ringling Brothers elephants
made to walk through the Queens-Midtown Tuunnel
and down 34th Street to the Garden.
So much of our desire like their bulky, shadowy walking
after midnight, exiled from the wild and destined
for a circus with its tawdry gaudiness, its unspoken
pathos.

It takes more than half a century to figure out who they were,
the few real loves-of-your-life and how much of the rest—
the mad breaking-heart stickiness—falls away, slowly,
unnoticed, the way you lose your taste for things
like Popsicles unthinkingly.
And though dailiness may have no place
for the ones that have etched themselves in the laugh lines
and frown lines on the face that's harder and harder
to claim as your own, often one love-of-your-life
will appear in a dream, arriving
with the weight and certitude of an elephant,
and it's always the heart that wants to go out and wash
the huge mysteriousness of what they meant, those memories
that have only memories to feed them, and only you to keep them clean.

My departure from the city of O.?
I took no leave.

I’d learned to sleep angry.

On a train I was contained.

The water under the bridge
was just that. Shunned metaphor.

It did not send waves of regret
or make me reflect.
It did not baptize, wash away, or cleanse.

The countryside appeared
like the sides of any country
where rain falls and cows chew yellow flowers.

The world was not too much
or too much with me.

I stomached it.

In the photograph I only look lonely
because I was alone.

You cannot see the envelope on my lap
or the letters lodged under sweaters in my suitcase.

I carried only one bag, what I could manage
in a crowd.

You can imagine I held a thick book
from which nothing could distract me.
You can imagine my head high, eyes dry.

I did not see my departure as a failure, or a fall.
I’d dodged a bullet. Been reborn.

You can imagine it that way.

Only none of it was like that,
not like that at all.

We come here
These little pillars of salt
Placed into the hands
Of physicians
With debt sweats
A gross product
Of the sex apparatus
There are expired teens
There are the old
That die in the summer
The situation
When a nation
Loses its beloved celebrity
It tries to out-mourn one another
Extort them of their talent
Versions of these chosen ones
Hair flowing free and unrestricted
Meanwhile
The curbs are laced
With water soluble prescriptions
Running down into gutters
Phosphorescent in the streetlight
Medications
Available in avocado
Coppertone
Aqua and white
I suffer from the occasional
Emotionally draining dream about turtles
However
The simple idea of omnipresent neutrality
Is difficult
Too much blood
Spills in my dreams
It’s a vascular debacle
Mantras
and
Ak-47s
Are boring
In the park
Getting some vitamin D
The sunlight on my blue jeans
I’m a deadened sapphire
Reading Didion
A psychic residue of fortune is on me
Didion writes,
“I have already lost touch
with a couple of people I used to be”
I can’t handle fate
The aphrodisiac of lying to myself
The battery flavor of anxiety
Shooting the messenger
Having a god that doesn’t ‘get me’

The idea was.
At least in theory,
Dust was a bad thing.

There was a bowl
Of it. At another
Point in time
The conclusion
Was reached
That everything
Was of it.

No season, no
Nothing to measure
To measure against
So no love or hate.
Left us without no
Moorings or so my
Father told me

Vanity tables of it?
Isn’t that what a vanity
Table is for?
What happens to
As its failings accrue?

No mission but to be clean.
Of itself.
But existing (time)
And problems there –
The problem of now
We are back here.

See the whole dust problem’s
No measure.
All’s dust, check.
All’s virtuous, check.
So why not live it up then?
And thus, YOLO etc. etc.

{These fok whirr pretty smart.
Thing is, even in
The dust bowl, the
Idea, a very American
One was that something
Wasn’t dust.
I wasn’t.
The Bowl wasn’t.
The dust wasn’t.

Since Ecclesiastes,
Been trying this one on.
(how’s that working out for you?)
One needn’t be geologically
Or for that matter
Psychologically trained to
Begin unpacking the diffident
And sometimes strained
Relation the nation holds with
All that is vanity.

You see the reason I had
To deliver you to the bank
Where the clangor of my causes
Could not rouse your fiscal ugliness
Was external
As only aridity can produce
Terranean worship of the body as passage.

There was no chill within me
At least not any unticked by time
I had to go in pursuit
Of shaved silicone
And pill queens in linen jumpsuits
I had to devote myself to cashmere chew toys
And create Worklife agendas of self-regard
You are your own pet coward now
Led like a gelding by a pink ribbon
And I am less deceived, but also less adored.

Your amenability to this disarticulation
Is my second victimhood
Beware of verdant land Beware of middling men
Now we slowly dig a trench
And your women ask us why
And you dolt, you have no response for them.

The future will depend on spirits
And the fob off of new Alphas
Who are self-professed business hippies
Soon every person will have been let down
By a guy who buys antiques online

First snow—I release her into it—
I know, released, she won't come back.
This is different from letting what,

already, we count as lost go. It is nothing
like that. Also, it is not like wanting to learn what
losing a thing we love feels like. Oh yes:

I love her.
Released, she seems for a moment as if
some part of me that, almost,

I wouldn't mind
understanding better, is that
not love? She seems a part of me,

and then she seems entirely like what she is:
a white dog,
less white suddenly, against the snow,

who won't come back. I know that; and, knowing it,
I release her. It's as if I release her
because I know.

'I love you,' he wouldn't say: it was against his philosophy; I-love-you
didn't mean what it meant, plus the verray construction of the phrase
caused bad-old-concrete-lawman-vandal-verbal-mildew-upon-the-grape-
harvest-and-war-for-rare-minerals-required-to-manufacture-commu-
nications-devices damage; saying I-love-you damaged love, subject and
object; plus he could prove this in two dense and delphic languages
suitable for philosophy, opera, cursing, and racking the nerves of arti-
ficial intelligence machines that perhaps could love but would be
hard-wired giammai to dare say so. So what moved him to not-say
I-love-you? What wake-up-and-spoil-the-coffee ashtray-licking djinn? I
have to start to agree. The verbness of it impropriety (eyes glob up the
syringe when you're giving blood: semisolid spiralling); perhaps too
active... I-love-you, I sand you, I drill you, I honey and set you for wasps,
crimson you like a stolen toga, add value applying dye, fight owner-
ship, I cite you to justify skilled outrage, put your name as guarantor
on an astronomical mortgage, I admit desertification comes as a relief,
from I to O, O my oasis, O my mirage. Maybe the verb is a tending-to-
wards? A tightrope? A tropism? A station? But that's meeting him on
his own ground; plus I can't disprove entire languages; plus those
three little words aren't meant as saying. An icy drink in stormlight. A
looked-at leaf left to transpire its own way until... And sans I-love-you
the centuried moon rose above dinnermint stone; many men contin-
ued  talking; a woman lifted her sarsenet skirt, peed on green lilies and,
utterly gracious, walked through the archway to join the mixed group
delighting in — word! believe it! — fresh air.

I love these raw moist dawns with
a thousand birds you hear but can't
quite see in the mist.
My old alien body is a foreigner
struggling to get into another country.
The loon call makes me shiver.
Back at the cabin I see a book
and am not quite sure what that is.

Darkness is not a death, does not obliterate,
will not bury you or take your breath away.
Darkness will not erase you the way it erases day with night
because darkness is not the clock but merely the time
falling away from the clock's circular face.
Darkness is not the loss but the thing misplaced,
not the hammer but the nail in its curved emergence
from wood's grasp, not the storm's insurgence
but the limbs broken off from their miraculous
suspension in a storm out far, beyond us.
Darkness is not about hearts, imperfect as they are,
but what leaks through their incorrigible doors, not the stars
but the glissade or glide of their dust.
Darkness no longer shields the hunters' musk
in search of you, or turns you to animal prey,
it is only a measure of weight or days.
Not something without a beginning or an end,
it is not even—especially not—an end.
Nor is it vertigo, nor the whole, but merely a piece.
No, darkness is but a ghost of an idea, the least
remembered, most estranged prayer, and your fear
but a lingering, limbic fear torn from shreds of forgotten years.
Only that much is clear.

I love them all.

I love that a handful, a mouthful, gets you by, a satchelful can land you a job, a
well-chosen clutch of them could get you laid, and that a solitary word can initiate
a stampede, and therefore can be formally outlawed—even by a liberal court
bent on defending a constitution guaranteeing unimpeded utterance. I love that
the Argentine gaucho has over two hundred words for the coloration of horses
and the Sami language of Scandinavia has over a thousand words for reindeer
based on age, sex, appearance—e.g., a busat has big balls or only one big ball.
More than the pristine, I love the filthy ones for their descriptive talent as well as
transgressive nature. I love the dirty ones more than the minced, in that I respect
extravagant expression more than reserved. I admire reserve, especially when
taken to an ascetic nth. I love the particular lexicons of particular occupations.
The substrate of those activities. The nomenclatures within nomenclatures. I am
of the unaccredited school that believes animals did not exist until Adam assigned
them names. My relationship to the word is anything but scientific; it is a matter
of faith on my part, that the word endows material substance, by setting the thing
named apart from all else. Horse, then, unhorses what is not horse.

The forever shoe,  which  points  homewards,  belongs to  my  mother.
When our house was  being built, she stepped onto the  driveway while
the tarmac was still wet, still setting. Ever since that step, the driveway,
which slants upwards,  bears an imprint of her 1971 footwear. Her foot-
print says,  Climb!  Come with me.  Whoever steps into that impression
becomes,  for a moment, the leggy wearer of a fire-red clog with a pirat-
ical silver buckle on the side.


The  sandals  which  will  make  a  female of me belong to many women.
The   front  of  the  temple  entrance  hides itself behind shoe-racks. Vis-
itors   enter  barefooted,  leaving   behind  the  dung,  dried frogs, spilled
petrol  and  ketchup  traces  of  the  streets.  Hundreds  of  pairs  of  gold
and  silver  sandals wait  here  for  the  women  who will re-emerge from
the  vigil  with  the  taste of  basil  leaf and sugar in  their deep-breathing
mouths  and  carpet  fibres between  their  toes.   The  sandals,  gold  and
silver,  seem all alike.  How  can the women tell them apart? They do tell
them apart. It  is  as if  each  pair  sings an  intimate mantra to its  owner,
audible  only to  her. One day I too shall return to expectant slippers that
stack  up  like the  moon  and  the  stars  outside a  marble  building;  one
day I shall not have to wear child's shoes.


Seven  years  of these shoes are a chemical memory.  The Convent ruled
that  pupils' shoes  must  be white: absolutely white.  Who  can  imagine
a  1980s  shoe  that  was  absolutely  white,  without  any  logo,  with  no
swoosh,  not  a  single slogan?  Sunday evenings, before the school week,
I  crouched  down  on  the  pink  bathroom  tiles  and  painted  my  shoes
into  the  absolute  of  whiteness;  like  the  Alice  in Wonderland garden-
ers  repainting  roses.  This  task  was  performed  with a  toothbrush and
with  special  paste that annihilated so many design features.  Purity was
attained  by  the application  of  a whitener  that  stank  of scientific poly-
syllables.  Convent-girl  identity.  Tabula rasa.  Toxicity  and intoxication:
with  good  intentions,  getting  high on paste.


When I met my ex, I was  already  committed to heels: black ankle  boots ​
with  four-inch  stacks for  walking through snow;  French  cream curved
suede  stilettos for scaling fire-escape  ladders  on to  rooftops  to  admire
the  winter  sky;  even after I  left him,  scarlet satin  bedroom-only  spiky
mules  to  amuse myself.  Early  on, my ex  said that the way women walk
in  heels  looks ugly.  And my  nails  made  unnatural  social appearances:
emerald  lacquer;  cobalt;  incarnadine. Sign of a  bad  marriage:  I  began
to  wear  flats. The penitential  mermaid shoes,  worn once and once only,
were  a Gabor creation: distressed  silver  ballet  slippers  with netted and
criss-cross side  details  which  would  make  the material  seem  to  swish
with  the changes  of  light on feet that go walking.  Cool  as  moonlight on
a  tourist  coastline. But the  inner  stitching  hooked  the  softness  of  my
skin, which  has  always  been  too  soft;  but  I could not turn back, for we
had  tickets  to an evening  of  Mozart;  but the paper tissues that I stuffed
into  my  shoes  failed to act as  a  protective   lining.   Paper  tissue  snow-
flecks  teardropped  with crimson  blood created  a  trail  behind  me  as  I
ascended  the  many  tiers  of  the  wedding-cake concert hall.


Sitting  next  to someone  can  make  my  feet  curl:  shy,  self-destructive
and  oyster-like, they want to  shuck  their cases,  to  present  themselves,
little undersea pinks; their skin  still  is  too  soft, their  toes still too long,
their  ankles still too slender, for a modern fit. But he  is not modern;  he
sits like stone, and my bare feet are cool, they will not have to bleed.

Valentine's palette is mostly grey. Next comes blue (borage, cobalt, silk, robe,
egg). Then white. Some inherent greens. But she draws most often from the
greyer end of the grey scale. It could be manifest in a postmortem jaw, dusty glass,
a sky, one degree Fahrenheit, a lone sock under a sickbed; the water is grey, and
the long wall where one exits a car. Grey is the intermediate state she inhabits with
no apparent effort. In the grey space, the bardo, the spirit starts to find shape, to
find internal structure.

I envied the dog lying in the yard
so I did it. But there was a pebble
under my flank so I got up and looked
for the pebble, brushed it away
and lay back down. My dog thus far
overlooked the pebble. I guess it's her thick
Lab fur. With my head downhill the blood gorged
me with ideas. Not good. Got up. Turned around. Now I
see hundreds of infinitesimal ants. I'm on an
ant home. I get up and move five feet.
The dog hasn't moved from her serene place.
Now I'm rather too near a thicket where
I saw a big black snake last week that might decide
to join me. I moved near the actual dog this time
but she got up and went under the porch. She doesn't like
it when I'm acting weird. I'm failing as a dog
when my own kind rejects me, but doing better
than when I envied birds, the creature the least
like us, therefore utterly enviable. To be sure
I cheeped a lot but didn't try to fly.
We humans can take off but are no good at landing.

It isn't true about the lambs.
They are not meek.
They are curious and wild,
full of the passion of spring.
They are lovable,
they are not silent when hungry.

Tonight the last of the triplet lambs
is piercing the quiet with its need.
Its siblings are stronger
and will not let it eat.

I am its keeper, the farmer, its mother,
I will go down to it in the dark,
in the cold barn,
and hold it in my arms.

but it will not lie still—it is not meek.

I will stand in the open doorway
under the weight of watching trees and moon,
and care for it as one of my own.

But it will not love me—it is not meek.

Drink, little one. Take what I can give you.
Tonight the whole world prowls
the perimeters of your life.

Your anger keeps you alive—
it's your only chance.
So I know what I must do
after I have fed you.

I will shape my mouth to the shape
of the sharpest words,
even those bred in silence.

I will inhale with words every ear
pressed upon open air.
I will not be meek.

You remind me of the necessity
of having more hope than fear,
and of sounding out terrible names.

I am to cry out loud
like a hungry lamb, cry loud
enough to waken wolves in the night.

No one can be allowed to sleep.

it isn't matter
isn't doesn't matter
does it compared
with what shan't
have known your
lines are all
lines of approach
this dog's eyelids
this delhi dog's
intentional eyelids, this
doorway dog, this
dog fellating beggars
delhi exuding matter
nictitation cannot extrude
America to england
the third nictitating
poetry is over
eyelid cannot eject
America to england
large foreign bodies
poetry is over
over and out
surgery rarely happens
over and ours
dogs aren't loved
over here, here!
sufficiently foreign bodies
remain requiring incision
mind yourself it
happened before you
as you go
you're nothing cold
sunshine practised apprehension

Yes, we'll gather by the river,
the beautiful, the beautiful river.
They say it runs by the throne of God.
This is where God invented fish.
Wherever, but then God's throne is as wide
as the universe. If you're attentive you'll
see the throne's borders in the stars. We're on this side
and when you get to the other side we don't know
what will happen if anything. If nothing happens
we won't know it, I said once. Is that cynical?
No, nothing is nothing, not upsetting just
nothing. Then again maybe we'll be cast
at the speed of light through the universe
to God's throne. His hair is bounteous.
All the 5,000 birds on earth were created there.
The firstborn cranes, herons, hawks, at the back
so as not to frighten the little ones.
Even now they remember this divine habitat.
Shall we gather at the river, this beautiful river?
We'll sing with the warblers perched on his eyelashes.

The Saturday morning meadowlark
came in from high up
with her song gliding into tall grass
still singing. How I'd like
to glide around singing in the summer
then to go south to where I already was
and find fields full of meadowlarks
in winter. But when walking my dog
I want four legs to keep up with her
as she thunders down the hill at top speed
then belly flops into the deep pond.
Lark or dog I crave the impossible.
I'm just human. All too human.

I was nineteen and mentally
infirm when I saw the prophet Isaiah.
The hem of his robe was as wide
as the horizon and his trunk and face
were thousands of feet up in the air.
Maybe he appeared because I had read him
so much and opened too many ancient doors.
I was cooking my life in a cracked clay
pot that was leaking. I had found
secrets I didn't deserve to know.
When the battle for the mind is finally
over it's late June, green and raining.

A violent windstorm the night before
the solstice. The house creaked and yawned.
I thought the morning might bring a bald earth,
bald as a man's bald head but not shiny.
But dawn was fine with a few downed trees,
the yellow rosebush splendidly intact.
The grass was all there dotted with Black
Angus cattle. The grass is indestructible
except to fire but now it's too green to burn.
What did the cattle do in this storm?
They stood with their butts toward the wind,
erect Buddhists waiting for nothing in particular.
I was in bed cringing at gusts,
imagining the contents of earth all blowing
north and piled up where the wind stopped,
the pile sky-high. No one can climb it.
A gopher comes out of a hole as if nothing happened.

The sun should be a couple of million miles
closer today. It wouldn't hurt anything
and anyway this cold rainy June is hard
on me and the nesting birds. My own nest
is stupidly uncomfortable, the chair
of many years. The old windows don't keep
the weather out, the wet wind whipping
my hair. A very old robin drops dead
on the lawn, a first for me. Millions
of birds die but we never see it—they like
privacy in this holy, fatal moment or so
I think. We can't tell each other when we die.
Others must carry the message to and fro.
"He's gone," they'll say. While writing an average poem
destined to disappear among the millions of poems
written now by mortally average poets.

Solstice at the cabin deep in the forest.
The full moon shines in the river, there are pale
green northern lights. A huge thunderstorm
comes slowly from the west. Lightning strikes
a nearby tamarack bursting into flame.
I go into the cabin feeling unworthy.
At dawn the tree is still smoldering
in this place the gods touched earth.

Try to remember it the way it was. Try to remember what I wore when I visited the prisons. Trying to remember how tall was my boy then. What books I was teaching. Trying to remember how I hoped to add one true and lonely word to the host of texts that bear upon incarceration.

Something about the extra-realism of that peculiar institution caused me to balk, also the resistance of poetry to the conventions of evidentiary writing, notwithstanding top-notch examples to the contrary: Mandelstam, Akhmatova, Wilde, Valéry, Celan, Desnos, et al. After all, I am not them. She asked me to come down, my friend the photographer and I went, and then I wanted to see whether my art could handle that hoe.

Trying to remember how my skin felt when I opened an envelope of proofs of Deborah Luster's intimate aluminum portraits of the inmates at Transylvania (the site of East Carroll Parish Prison Farm, a minimum-security male prison, now closed); then Angola (the site of Louisiana State Penitentiary, maximum security, ever-growing); then St. Gabriel (the site of the Louisiana Correctional Institution for Women, the LCIW). I was electrified by the first face—a young, handsome man blowing smoke out of his nose. Behind every anonymous number, a very specific face.

On the phone my friend had described to me the rich Delta grounds of Angola, 18,000 acres. Angola, where the topsoil is measured not in inches but feet. The former sugarcane plantation lies at the confluence of rivers and borderland of the vermin-and-vine-choked Tunica Hills. Grey pelicans nest on the two prison lakes; alongside the airstrip are the grading sheds, the endless fields of okra and corn. Then there's the prison museum, the prison radio station, the prison monthly magazine; the tracking horses and tracking dogs trained by inmates... and the tree-lined neighborhood of free-world residents, their children bused outside the fence to school. Then the immaculate cinderblock buildings that house the inmates, the administration building, and the death house; the greenhouse and extensive flower beds—take away the fencing and it resembles nothing so much as a college campus. The men in maximum number more than the men who lived in my hometown. Then there's the geriatric unit, the award-winning hospice program; the caisson the inmates built to bear the dead in the hand-built coffins to one of the two graveyards inside the prison. In the old burial ground most graves are not identified by name. The caisson is pulled by draft horses, French Quarter style. When the champion of the prison rodeo had a heart attack in the fields, a riderless horse led the final procession. The celebrated inmate's uniform was "retired" to the prison museum.

Everything about Louisiana seems to constitute itself differently from everywhere else in the Union: the food, the idiom, the stuff in the trees, the critters in the water, and the laws, Napoleonic, not mother-country common law. The prisons inevitably mirror differences found in the free world. Where they came up with their mirrors is another mystery. (In maximum, they are made of metal.) The definition of the face is a memory.

Vivid to me is Debbie saying that at the trial of her mother's murderer, she looked around and saw the people sitting on separate sides of the courtroom, the way they do at a wedding, the bride's people, the groom's people, and she tried to take in the damage radiating through the distinct lines—the perpetrator's side, the victim's side.

Vivid to me is leaving Angola after the first visit and Debbie asking what I thought, and I said (too fast) I thought those were the nicest people I had ever met, and the ironic laughter it provoked in us both, the car yawing. The obvious truth, people are people. Equally, the damage is never limited to perpetrator and victim. Also, that the crimes are not the sum of the criminal any more than anyone is entirely separable from their acts.

I remember an afternoon at the iron pile at Transylvania watching the men quietly plait each other's hair between sets at the weight bench. When I asked about a man whose face was severely scarred, a very specific face, with large, direct aquamarine eyes, a guard told me that the man's brother had thrown a tire over his head and set it on fire. This I did not know how to absorb. It was a steaming day; the men were lifting weights and plaiting their hair.

I remember Easter weekend at the women's prison. The day before, a long line formed outside the prison-run beauty shop. Inside, the women having their hair fixed were talking back to a soap opera on the small snowy screen. By visiting day the inner courtyard had been transformed into a theme park for the children. A trampoline had been rented, a cotton-candy machine; someone dressed in a bunny suit was organizing an egg hunt. The girls wore starched, flouncy dresses, and the boys white jackets and black, clip-on bow ties. The women were dressed up, too, even the ones shackled at ankle and waist. Deborah photographed all day, nonstop. Identifiable pictures of children would have to be excluded from publication, but people wanted a keepsake. We left before visiting hours ended. It wasn't our place to be there. It wasn't really in us to be there.

Remember sitting in the frigid Holiday Inn bar near St. Gabriel, at the end of one visit to the women's prison, staring at the aquarium, not talking.

Talking to a man who says he has done a lot of time. Lot of time. He should write a book, he says. He wants to be a success. "Hollywood, huh, here I come."

Talking to a woman who says the one time her dad visited her from the Midwest, she asked him to look at her eyes. There was a look she didn't want to get, a faraway look. Her father pretended to examine her eyes, then told her they looked like the same old peepers to him. She passed her time reading. Same way she passed her childhood. She thought she was going to be an astronomer when she grew up. Not a felon.

Both parents are dead now. Of her three sons, one disappeared, one died of suicide, and the third severed contact.

One of the inmates at St. Gabriel informed me she wouldn't be around for visiting hours tomorrow because she was on the drill team. Also, her ex-husband would not be bringing her baby boy to see her. Not tomorrow, not ever.

The grease burns, I am told by another inmate, are courtesy of her sister.

Don't Walk On The Grass, says the sign posted in the inner yard.

Then there's the bus that leaves from Monroe taking visitors to one of four neighboring pens, Al Derry's Prison Transport and Popcorn Balls. Evidently, the popcorn balls make it the competitive ride. Only in Louisiana.

After a time. A lot of time. They stop coming. The free-worlders. They are too poor or too busy working or are already looking after others on the outside or their car is broken or they are too worn down or they move too far off or they get old, sick, and die. So the inmates wait for their turn.

They aren't going anywhere. They have all the time there is.

"The only continuity of our lives," wrote Malcolm Braly, American writer, American lifer, "was that we had none."

"Waiting," goes the motto at St. Gabriel, "it's the LCIW way."

I wrote a woman and asked whether she ever had any pets. She wrote back: Bandit, Baby, Snobby, Elsie, Bear (those were the dogs). Tiger and Fuzzball (the cats), Jill, Ben, and Junior (the coons). And a lot of unnamed fish, hamsters, rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese, guinea pigs, "and a deer, not really a pet but I finally coaxed to the point she would eat out of my hand."

Not to idealize, not to judge, not to exonerate, not to aestheticize immeasurable levels of pain. Not to demonize, not anathematize. What I wanted was to unequivocally lay out the real feel of hard time. I wanted it given to understand that when you pass four prisons in less than an hour, the countryside's apparent emptiness is more legible. It is an open, running comment when the only spike in employment statistics is being created by the supply of people crossing the line.

I wanted the banter, the idiom, the soft-spoken cadence of Louisiana speech to cut through the mass-media myopia. I wanted the heat, the humidity, the fecundity of Louisiana to travel right up the body. What I wanted was to convey the sense of normalcy for which humans strive under conditions that are anything but what we in the free world call normal, no matter what we may have done for which we were never charged.

The world of the prison system springs up adjacent to the free world. As the towns decline, the prisons grow. As industries disappear, prisons proliferate, state-funded prison-building surges are complemented by private-investment promising "to be an integral component of your corrections strategy," according to an industry founder. The interrelation of poverty, illiteracy, substance and physical abuse, mental illness, race, and gender to the prison population is blaring to the naked eye and borne out by the statistics. Of the developed nations, only Russia aspires to our rate of incarceration. And the Big Bear is a distant second. Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury, the warp in the mirror is of our making.

The popular perception is that art is apart. I insist it is a part of. Something not in dispute is that people in prison are apart from. If you can accept—whatever level of discipline and punishment you adhere to momentarily set aside—that the ultimate goal should be to reunite the separated with the larger human enterprise, it might behoove us to see prisoners, among others, as they elect to be seen, in their larger selves. If we go there, if not with our bodies then at least our minds, we are more likely to register the implications.


I am going to prison.
I am going to visit three prisons in Louisiana.
I am going on the heels of my longtime friend Deborah Luster, a photographer.
It is a summons.
All roads are turning into prison roads.
I already feel guilty.
I haven't done anything.
But I allow the mental pull in both directions.
I am going to prison in order to write about it. Like a nineteenth-century traveler.
Kafka put it this way, "Guilt is never to be doubted."
Also: behind every anonymous number, a very specific face.
Also: there are more than two million individuals, in this country, whose sentences have rendered them more or less invisible. Many of them permanently.
First to Transylvania. Then Angola. Then St. Gabriel. These are their place-names
Over the next year and a half Deborah Luster will photograph upwards of 1,500 inmates.
I will make three trips.
It is an almost imperceptible gesture, a flick of the conscience, to go, to see, but I will be wakeful.
It is a summons.

It was necessary to move, and at this exit
the beggar, cross-legged at the fork of the tunnel,
calls out Love! A welcome, of sorts.
                The night light fucks the suburb
into nightmare familiarity —
not like a shrammed nerd touting
guided walks and histories that contract
imagination for demolition work,
levelling today's housing,
restoring common greens,
lingering at sites orphaned of their fever
hospitals — by no means that hyperliterate,
poor entrepreneur —

It is the view, the barbed wire roaring into view
round and round the playground walltop.
It is the warehouse, warehouse windows blank of occupation.
It is lives, lives supplied in great number,
fulfilment of numbers.
It is the sense of something shared —
the tailor scissors razoring open
fishmouth stitches, the sewn-up pocket
of the new suit,
and finding something —

But it is new, all new,
even the gangs who graffiti chimneys
scrubbed and lovely, deleted
like the railways delete
repeatedly
the head, the occasionally payrolled head,
the feet
of the quartered commuters, of the vertebral week

But it is not always quiet here.
Things go on while we sleep the sleep of soldiers.

Ancient branches crack and splinter into dust.
Large wings snap open in spring
like carpets splayed out over the railing.

Granite splits apart at the seams
and great animals cleave roads through woods.

Daily, in the density, there is life
on the edge of the knife that cuts the world
into hemispheres of sense and death.

Trees are born and die, bones turn to humus,
glaciers to meadowland. It is time

to turn yourself loose, like new leaves,
like big lakes on which swim enormous birds
at a distance deeper in breadth than the water's depth.

Their shadows pull you to the shore.
Their size fills your lungs with sky. It is time

to heave aside the boulders and the dams,
to come back out like a bear after the thaw, to be
ready for the forest, for the forage, for the full

and waning moons. You will get soaked in wet grass,
feel the insects pierce your skin. You will learn

to balance between gravity and light. There will be
hot and sticky nights, sharp songs at dawn,
long and bright ineffable days.

This is your chance to crash your way
through underbrush unlocking like so many doors.

Will death be like this?
Like waking from a long dream

still held—grounded—
in the body disremembered? Spinning

ceiling, close call? Foolish beating
heart? Those trembling

aftershocks of some electric message
where bone met motion,

clamoring in ligaments,
that lingering tremolo singing in the ears

like doubt, maybe
the echo of some unrecognized

once-familiar name. Estranged touch
of wind over skin,

on damp arms the hair
not yet laid down . . .

Breath's sour fluctuations
not quite tamed. Cheeks' flush

loosening, a displaced temperature
sensed, unseasonal. Flash of light

burning against walls, image after image,
an eye, a frame, missing there.

Where, searching, searchless, you can't point to
or put a finger on, nevertheless an urge

surging in raised fingers. A circle
discontinuous, once rounded out by mouth.

Throbbing inside the brow,
no accessible thought. Specifically

no memory arising from
follicles still tingling, the dulling skull heedless,

singed with salty pores.
What if it's like this, only without the body?

I worry much about the suffering
of Machado. I was only one when he carried
his mother across the border from Spain to France
in a rainstorm. She died and so did he
a few days later in a rooming house along a dry canal.
To carry Mother he abandoned a satchel
holding his last few years of poetry.
IVe traveled to Collioure several times
to search for Machado's lost satchel.
The French fed him but couldn't save him.
There's no true path to a death —
we discover the path by walking.
We turn a corner on no road
and there's a house on a green hill
with a thousand colorful birds sweeping in a circle.
Are the poems in the basement of the house on the hill?
We'll find out if we remember earth at all.

I feel my failure intensely
as if it were a vital organ
the gods grew from the side of my head.
You can't cover it with a hat and I no longer
can sleep on that side it's so tender.
I wasn't quite faithful enough
to carry this sort of weight up the mountain.
When I took my vows at nineteen
I had no idea that gods were so merciless.
Fear makes for good servants
and bravery is fraudulent. When I awoke
I wasn't awake enough.

What hand opened the door, I don't know. No one
lives there in winter. And I don't know if it was for entrance
or for exit that the place opened itself, or was opened,
though I do know what boundaries
were broken. The lake lay frozen, the sky
still as folded wings. And everywhere snow

blown into the rooms, strewn across the braided rugs
and knotty boards, under chairs, creeping
like a slow cold tide, white and silent, out of its element

with greed. Then I remembered the photograph,
black and white, as old as me or older. What eye
watched that scene, taking it in, shameless, I don't know,
though I do know that boundaries were broken:

A woman, her grey dress blowing toward land,
lost on the shore in the dim light of her long day's end,
and a man, farther up the beach, alone. The sea—
mute, infinite entity—taking in its borders hungrily;

and the stolen child it drank up when each
entered the other in a moment
of dropped vigilance. In this kind of world no blueprint

instructs us how to house what we love
against the winds of loss. The woman, the man,
their child gone—slipped from the safe home of their love,
swallowed whole. I am not going to try to feel

what that woman felt, or to speak with her voice. I don't know
what she did next or how she did what she did next.
She is the mother, my fear, all the love ever lost to grief.
Her pain is an ocean vaster than planets, a diaspora

of longing flung to all four flogging winds. In her life,
I am sure that time drifted past her, with her, within her.
I know that that summer, like all summers, moved on
through the fall into winter, that the shore closed up,
abandoned, cold. And that the thing lost

still blows through us, the swollen door no longer shuts.

I once carried my mollusk tune
All the way to the lottery of gods.

Rain was the old funeral choir
That keened of a hemisphere

Moored under lampwings.
Clouds never left. I knew

The lights would shine clearer
If I closed my eyes, just as

I knew the Pacific would teach
Me to sleep before tying my

Name to the flaming. Here I
Am now at the end of amethyst,

Drizzling another lost sunrise
Inside the quilt of your hand

Was it Pascal who said “Almost all our misery has come from not being able to remain alone in our rooms”? Baudelaire thought it might have been, but was not sure. And let’s take a look at that “almost” which I’m very glad is there. I can think of lots of misery that had nothing to do with my not having been alone in my room. When I get a rejection email on a train for a piece of work I had high hopes for is one example. Or to go way back, when I returned home to find my white mouse dead when I was eleven or twelve. Or to take a mundane example, when a plane I’m booked on is twelve hours delayed, while I hang about the airport.

I have never had a huge problem with solitude, it is true. As a child I read voraciously, and would find some hidden corner to lurk with my book. The game of golf is one where one can enjoy being alone, especially very early on a beautiful morning. The time when I most felt alone was when the missionaries came to my school and we all had to endure a silent retreat for three days. At the end of that time I felt like one of those astronauts in films who have to stay on the moon for months.

Baudelaire claimed his friend the Devil loved bleak, solitary places where the spirit of murder and lust was more likely to ignite. He decided that this was not really a danger for most of us, though, only for those idle, fanciful folk prone to enigmas and dreaming. The type of person who should most avoid being alone is a chatterbox or maybe a television pundit. But what’s to stop these people being verbose in their own company? Did Crusoe, for example, stay quiet on his island before Friday came? According to Elizabeth Bishop in her great poem, “Crusoe in England,” he did not.

And in order to write that poem, Ms. Bishop needed to be alone. This did not stop her from cooking meals and inviting friends to help her eat the food and drink wine with her. After this, probably the next morning, she went back to the poem and her solitude.

I feel the French maybe exaggerate the benefits of  being alone. That philosopher and writer Jean-Paul Sartre for example, his play Huis-clos with its famous line “L’enfer, c’est les autres.” Yes, we all know how annoying other people often are, and how strong the urge to escape from them can be. But the two characters Vladimir and Estragon in Beckett’s Waiting for Godot show that even in an absurdist setting companionship has its importance. It’s said Beckett got his inspiration for this play from one or other of two versions of Caspar David Friedrich’s painting Two Men Contemplating the Moon which he saw on a trip to Germany in 1936 or ’37. In both versions of the painting one of the men has his hand on the other man’s shoulder, a sign of companionship if ever there was one.

Baudelaire quotes the French philosopher and moralist Jean de la Bruyère (or Delabruyère, as the man signed himself), “What a great misfortune we cannot be alone,” as if to chastise anyone who wants to plunge into a crowd or go into a busy bar. What about the great French word fraternité, the third of the three words that were the rallying cry of the Revolution? I want to close this by giving another quote from de la Bruyère: “Out of difficulties grow miracles.” I prefer this one. Anyone in an awkward social situation should dwell on that.

“Good Barber of the Pea!” I exhumed,
high into the vag
where the barber keeps his
pea — 

“Good Sprout!” His mouth, his gray,
hunted tongue,
always in the distance — 
“No use denying
we master the particular service
we deny ourselves. In the shade of this pea
(the sum of his shade and the gavel
flexing above his head)
I will become
a milliner to cover what work I’ve
done. Or else, I’ll begin anew

at the infant chin,
where nothing grows but chins!
Outside, snails, vines, surpass me
and must — gaining pews upon
pews. But don’t think for a sec
I don’t know the way out of here, that release is
one hair — spiral stair — top of which
cleavage evaporates”

I can bring a halo
into the night cave, quiet
with music (do not ask the music),

to her shaded there
in the moon; her fine spectacles
steam their pond rings;

her animal eyes fix
on the lintel of the door
as the wax owl glances back at me. I am her little cotton

tree the breeze combs
white into a final note,
her diminuendo poco a poco ...    

Moon-afro, myself
outpaces me
in wonder of her.

She goes off and I seep
under the black sprout
of her house, to rise

a salmon bell on the hill
dissolving mild cloud fractals,
without grief or malice.

Standing in front of a mirror, my mother tells me she is ugly
says the medication is making her fat. I laugh & walk her
back to the bed. My mother tells me she is ugly in the same voice
she used to say no woman could love you & I watch her
pull at her body & it is mine. My heavy breast.
My disappointing shape. She asks for a bowl of plain broth
& it becomes the cup of vinegar she would pour down my throat.
Everyday after school, I would kneel before her.
I would remove my clothes & ask her to mark the progress.
It’s important that I mention, I truly wanted to be beautiful
for her. In my dreams I am thin & if not thin, something better.
I tell my mother she is still beautiful & she laughs. The room fills
with flies. They gather in the shape of a small boy. They lead her
back to the mirror, but my reflection is still there.

I used to be a dog. What kind? Oh, a mongrel. Nothing poncy like the black cocker spaniel called Bonzo I had as a child. And certainly not one of those four-footed, aloof snakes that go by the name of greyhound. I remember each and every one of the lice that lived on me.

Where did I live? In Sicily, where the sun shines like a fried egg every day of the year. I had the nose of an angel — I could smell porcini fifty trees away. I knew the man who would start a fight with my master the moment he walked in the bar door. I drank a saucer of red wine every day. I loved eating the butterflies that floated past me — one pounce and they were gone. And they were delicious. Better than the bones of a donkey whose meat provided salami for my master and his family. The boy was very good to me — he used to take me down to the sea and let me splash in the waves; then I’d come out onto the sand, barking, and I’d shake all the seawater onto him, wetting his clothes. He loved laughing, and I loved barking. Those were the days.

I never saw a kennel. My home was an old blanket under a gnarled vine that had been there since Dante wrote his only sestina, in homage to the troubadours. The heat was often scorching. The boy found it funny to put a straw hat on my head, one dyed in the colors of the Italian flag. I was up early, out scouting for rats to frighten away. I once peed on a hedgehog to see what it would do. I ran along the clifftop, barking at the wheeling seagulls, and at the fishing boats they flew above. I sometimes ate my master’s leftover spaghetti bolognese in the taverna. My tail would wag like a fan revolving from the ceiling. I was taught party tricks that I’d be asked to do when the grappa was being downed. I’d lie down on the floor and die, to great applause. I’d sit up and beg, to coos and laughter, and I’d be rewarded with a sausage, and those were sausages to swim the Adriatic for.

I’d sometimes go down to the harbor to look for an attractive gray bitch I liked the smell of. I’d have to fight off other dogs, but I was good at that. I ate one of their ears. Once I followed her onto a boat that was heading out to fill up with fish. I had to swim back and I lay on the sand and slept. When I got home my master whipped me. I ran to my blanket, whimpering.

I was once brought to a circus, and into the tent of a one-eyed woman with black hair who had a pet parrot. I barked at it, and the parrot expertly returned my bark. I lay on the multi-colored mat and observed the strange bird who observed me. I was glad to leave that tent.

I enjoyed hearing the boy play his flute in the evenings. I heard those notes flutter up into the air, and I tried to see them, but never could. I never stopped trying, though.

The one thing I couldn’t eat was cheese. The few times I tried it I vomited. On the first occasion that happened I tried to eat it again. If I got the chance now I’d manage it, I’m sure. Who would not like to be a dog in the sun? A dog in the sun, like I used to be, long ago. It was an honor.

I lived a long time as both woman and girl it nearly killed me
I don’t want an ordinary moment any longer no more gestures
Such as the oaks neither shake nor fidget in observation
And the objects worth discussing dissipate oh how they leak
Away from the creeds claiming one can get ahead of the pain
By naming see how the green will change you it really will
I went into the green with a vine across my back and from the mud
Came the pattern before the light could enter light turned
And denied us, the moss struggled toward the yellow
A fine pollen came up from the world and the road made this
Shape in the powder: What’s wrong with right here?
There’s a cape behind my eyes and the body inside it wallows

Across patches of burned up grass untender and lines perpendicular
To the gate I couldn’t open an outrage regularly loiters
Isn’t that weird, how talent carries time?
Nothing’s resolved today and the hours are dim but vital
A body in a cloak upon a road rolling sweetly through the mind
Place this road in some distant future just like that foregone past
And then offensively remember how women don’t exist
Get head of the pain the ages counsel, make plenty of money

Wherever we go, needs feed and I find it harder and harder to
believe benevolence is the thing Thousands of Yazidi girls

missing and plastic fills the ocean’s mouth and the cursive of
yr name still occupies the canopy of my throat Fuel, the under-

pinning What fires your gd engine Rigor, mortis Cold as
unmoving or unmoved The opposite of music Warm in the

cold universe Molten, forming A rock becoming magma
becoming lava becoming land Land, the trauma of lava Lava

the lamp of the ancestors and later a cheeky find in the Junk
shop and rising in our living room Livin groom Just bc nothing

cares doesn’t mean it lacks meaning What’s the point of
curiosity but a train rolling past the spot where the Donner

Party feasted n then go on a four hour Wikipedia downward
spiral I’m the closest thing to a mime parade I whisper, home

late tiptoeing down the creaky hallway tryin not to wake my
roommates Nice chicken parm, sluts, I say to my fingers at

lunch Dissociation is evacuating from the inside I just know
we’ll have a good time Junk: a relief map of yr traumas Dipping

yr whole arm into the bin of sunflower seeds I’m in my Shonda
Rhimes Year of Yes n so far it’s pretty freak Gave a beej 2 a

logger in town for a football game at his hostel (almost wrote
hostile) the old-fashioned way, as in I met him at a bar after

lingering eye contact No apps Told him I was writing this poem
Flush with success after only eating half the cheeseburger for

dinner For the first time in my life it wasn’t no burger or four
burgers Full on Rocky situation He said he was flattered every

time his gf’s gay friends grabbed his beer can Bacon-wrapped-
date-flavored Doritos The artifice of order Predictability,

measured time, present wrapping Order, Order, Pockets of
Order Or, Durham I dumped a boy from Raleigh today The

baton of Junk The dance whirls Whorls War Tortle Cut to mall
dressing room thousand outfits montage Ignorance as a tool to

revive the feeling of doing something new Junk has to be the
poem of our time Pointless accumulation Clinging to a million

denials Why do you need an assault rifle? What if radioactive
bears Buying in bulk Afraid of forgetting that night in 2007

when Chantal shouted jamiroquai is holding this party
together!!!! Junk is the garbage ppl keep Didn’t they tell you

I’m a meteorologist but for people What’s that called? Psychic?
Psychic side chick In maths, “arbitrary” is a thing w/o specific

value Quite the Junkery The world, all of its rock formations
and space missions and presidents and religious phobias and

fashions fossils All of it has always seemed so arbitrary to me,
bc to survive this long into an occupation feels sometimes so

arbitrary to be And then sometimes so divine Who else could
survive but my line It’s true, your Junk won’t save you from a

tsunami, but I’m descended from a group whose culture history
language gods cosmology calendar stories government gait was

capital “O” Obliterated I’ll stop writing this when it stops hap-
pening So when I “get” anything it’s hard to let go Resisting

death for generations, I want to make the opposite of death No
excuse for a vanilla bean tapioca ball attitude Ever bought a

McFlurry n shouted yr dead inside but yew were pointing a
finger at yrself and, horrified, yew screamed Ran home but half-

way home yew forgot what yew were doing n bought a pair of
sneaker boots at DSW or just me? I’m building the archive of a

life that shouldn’t exist Wristband from that gay club in
Cartagena where we danced w/ the self-proclaimed Perez

Hilton of Colombia Every bar frankly should have tostones
smellin up the grill Is a poem abt Junk itself merely an accum-

ulation of doomsday and birth certificates If part of Junk is
letting go, partly Junk is letting go of you Junk finds a new boo


•


“Control” by Janet Jackson is one of the greatest songs in the
nation Warm hearts sparkle in the colonial afternoon Control

is a reaction to something smacking that cracks the future
w/ no precedent We call this a paradigm shift — say we were

totally blindsided Janet wants to take control from her parents
From the loss of a first love Control of the narrative Janet

wants to Black Cat in boxy military garb Janet wants to show
you her midriff and introduce J. Lo to the general public in

a few albums Shock is a kind of collision A booming confusion
The shudder and the shot are almost indistinguishable Shock

has its electric correlate, but is also itself by what surrounds
the event: a quiet dinner party vs sweaty racing thoughts And

what do you make of it My friend said he found out his crush
graduated college in 2014 n hates himself And I’m like wait

til yr my age thinkin, I totally still look like I’m in my 20s Then
it turns out the dude you were makin out with was born the

year Janet, the album, came out What the literal fudge An hour
ago you were singing “That’s the Way Love Goes” at karaoke

In my defense, taller dudes always look older How to negotiate
control and the lack of control When yr slap hand gets itchy OK

whenever anybody dumps you just think of them as a gif of a
white dude wilding out to Wu Tang in a cardigan then suddenly

falling into the Grand Canyon — Dating is all the way dumb I
don’t know what, if any of this, will reach yr peepers but I want

to ask you this (and I am guilty of making ppl wade thru some
bullshit b4 getting to my point): What do you turn to when

breath dashes from yr body like it’s on the lamb? Cindy Craw-
ford says lighting is everything Take a selfie from the sun-

blown window Even supermodels say “lighting” It’s comforting!
But there’s also value in exposing yr engine #BadSelfie Archaic

but also so fresh: self-expression Trust is a thing that guides
you thru a feed The voice like a handshake I’m in front of you

There is paper and a trade-off This is ancient, like pixel drift
What’s under the hood of irritation We call complication a knot

A knotted life that doesn’t get to be undone Who here has a
clear, linear rope? Denial! You have to love yr knots You have

to shout them out Curate if need be Janet turns her knots into
songs Sonic beauty (tho fuck beauty) Knot is the response A

manager is like a politician Not the minutiae but the orchest-
ration The dark forest It’s hard not to inhale The cave is where

to turn when you’ve no other recourse This isn’t a discussion
This isn’t a mandate (lol man date) This isn’t an answer This is

a lineage: Lascaux, Keith Haring, Rihanna How do you draw
breath? In and down Heel to crown Janet says I’m in control

and ends Don’t make me lose it As if she knows what’s to come.
The battle of control is in learning to make, and giving it up

WHEREAS a string-bean blue-eyed man leans back into a swig of beer work-weary lips at the dark bottle keeping cool in short sleeves and khakis he enters the discussion;

Whereas his wrist loose at the bottleneck to come across as candid “Well at least there was an Apology that’s all I can say” he offers to the circle each of them scholarly;

Whereas under starlight the fireflies wink across East Coast grass and me I sit there painful in my silence glued to a bench in the midst of the American casual;

Whereas a subtle electricity in that low purple light I felt their eyes on my face gauging a reaction and someone’s discomfort leaks out in a well-stated “Hmmm”;

Whereas like a bird darting from an oncoming semi my mind races to the Apology’s assertion “While the establishment of permanent European settlements in North America did stir conflict with nearby Indian tribes, peaceful and mutually beneficial interactions also took place”;

Whereas I cross my arms and raise a curled hand to my mouth as if thinking as if  taking it in I allow a static quiet then choose to stand up excusing myself  I leave them to unease;

Whereas I drive down the road replaying the get-together how the man and his beer bottle stated their piece and I reel at what I could have said or done better;

Whereas I could’ve but didn’t broach the subject of “genocide” the absence of this term from the Apology and its rephrasing as “conflict” for example;

Whereas since the moment had passed I accept what’s done and the knife of my conscience pierces with bone-clean self-honesty;

Whereas in a stirred conflict between settlers and an Indian that night in a circle;

Whereas I struggle to confess that I didn’t want to explain anything;

Whereas truthfully I wished most to kick the legs of that man’s chair out from under him;

Whereas to watch him fall backward legs flailing beer stench across his chest;

Whereas I pictured it happening in cinematic slow-motion delightful;

Whereas the curled hand I raised to my mouth was a sign of indecision;

Whereas I could’ve done it but I didn’t;

Whereas I can admit this also took place, yes, at least;



WHEREAS we ride to the airport in a van they swivel their necks and shoulders around to speak to me sugar and lilt in their voices something like nurses their nursely kindness through my hair then engage me as comrades in a fight together. Well what we want to know one lady asks is why they don’t have schools there? Her outrage empathy her furrowed brow. There are schools there I reply. Grade schools high schools colleges. But why aren’t there any stores there? There are stores there. Grocery stores convenience stores trading posts whatever what-have-you I explain but it’s here I recognize the break. It’s here we roll along the pavement into hills of conversation we share a ride we share a country but live in alternate nations and here I must tell them what they don’t know or, should I? Should I is the moment to seize and before I know it I say Well you know Native people as in tribes as in “people” living over there are people with their own nations each with its own government and flag they rise to their own national songs and sing in their own languages, even. And by there I mean here all around us I remind them. Drifting in side-glances to whirring trees through the van windows then back to me they dig in they unearth the golden question My God how come we were never taught this in our schools? The concern and furrow. But God the slowing wheels and we lurch forward in the van’s downshift and brake. Together we reach a full-stop. Trapped in a helix of traffic we’re late for check-in security flights our shoulders flex forward into panicked outward gazes nerves and fingers cradle our wristwatches so to answer their question now would be untimely because to really speak to it ever is, untimely. But there Comrades there there Nurses. I will remember the swing of your gold earrings. There your perfume around me as a fresh blanket. There you checked my pulse kindly. There the boundary of bedside manners;


WHEREAS a woman I know says she watched a news program a reporter detailed the fire a house in which five children burned perhaps their father too she doesn’t recall exactly but remembers the camera on the mother’s face the mother’s blubbering her hiccuping and wail she leans to me she says she never knew then in those times that year this country the northern state she grew up in she was so young you see she’d never seen it before nobody talked about them she means Indians she tells me and so on and so on but that moment in front of the TV she says was like opening a box left at her door opening to see the thing inside whereas to say she learned through that mother’s face can you believe it and I let her finish wanting someone to say it but she hated saying it or so she said admitting how she never knew until then they could feel;


WHEREAS the word whereas means it being the case that, or considering that, or while on the contrary; is a qualifying or introductory statement, a conjunction, a connector. Whereas sets the table. The cloth. The saltshakers and plates. Whereas calls me to the table because Whereas precedes and invites. I have come now. I’m seated across from a Whereas smile. Under pressure of formalities, I fidget I shake my legs. I’m not one for these smiles, Whereas I have spent my life in unholding. What do you mean by unholding? Whereas asks and since Whereas rarely asks, I am moved to respond, Whereas, I have learned to exist and exist without your formality, saltshakers, plates, cloth. Without the slightest conjunctions to connect me. Without an exchange of questions, without the courtesy of answers. This has become mine, this unholding. Whereas, with or without the setup, I can see the dish being served. Whereas let us bow our heads in prayer now, just enough to eat;

Oh, I said, this is going to be.
And it was.
Oh, I said, this will never happen.
But it did.
And a purple fog descended upon the land.
The roots of trees curled up.
The world was divided into two countries.
Every photograph taken in the first was of people.
Every photograph taken in the second showed none.
All of the girl children were named And.
All of the boy children named Then.

This is an old apartment and therefore the mirrors are huge and ornate. They go with the high ornate ceilings. There’s one such mirror in the living room and another in the bedroom. Both have intricately carved borders and a leafy crest on top. In the living room these have been painted over in white, but in the bedroom it’s still the original gilt rococo. Both mirrors sit on top of fireplaces and are as big as tombs. I think the descriptive term for them is French Regency Baroque.

The mirror in the bathroom is pretty big too, and again somewhat ornate. And there are two other mirrors here as well. Not bad for a small, one-bedroom flat.

The problem is I’ve never been too fond of mirrors. I rarely look into them, and only then to make sure my hair isn’t sticking up, or there’s no toothpaste showing, or when I’m fine-trimming the beard, to make sure I’ve missed no section. Oh, there are exceptional other occasions. Once when I got a red eye on a transatlantic flight, for example, I kept checking on the progress of the red’s disappearance. Or when I fell on gravel and got an ugly friction wound on my forehead, I had to first deal with applying the dressing, then keep an eye on how that healing was coming along. Very slowly, as it happened.

As for gazing into the mirror to see if  I look OK enough to go out into the world, or — perish the thought — if I look attractive today, the answer is no way! Que sera, sera, as the song goes.

Tiny children love the mirror and it’s very pleasant to watch them gazing into it. Dogs don’t understand it and bark fiercely at the rival dog that’s their reflection. I once gave a woman a full-length mirror as an Xmas present. It wasn’t ornate or gilded, and it got smashed soon afterwards, and seven years of bad luck followed.

But if   I want to look at myself in the mirror regularly or for lengthy periods there’s plenty opportunity for it in this apartment. I could even stand naked and see everything. And as Monsieur Baudelaire reminds us, according to the immortal principles of 1789, everyone has equal rights; therefore I have the right to behold myself with pleasure or distaste. It is between me and my conscience.

I want to read at the white house.
I want to read poems at the white house.
I want to read poems at the white house with all the pomp available.
With celebratory music and all my beloveds watching.
With Baraka and DiPrima and Roque Dalton behind me
I want to read at the white house.
I want to read poems at the white house wearing my favorite clothes probably a hoodie or perhaps my Belgian suit.
Belgium is a failed state in the heart of Europe which is something to aspire to.
I like Belgium and one day I might like to read poems at the palace of the nation but for now I want to read poems at the white house.
I want to read poems and sing karaoke and I will probably tell a few nervous jokes.
It will be like all the other readings.
We will be there together.
I want to read poems at the white house and then like any house reading we will all clean up together.
We will clean up the mess we have made together.
All that rubble and all those ashes. These are my conditions.

and it was political.
I made coffee and the coffee was political.
I took a shower and the water was.
I walked down the street in short shorts and a Bob Mizer tank top
and they were political, the walking and the shorts and the beefcake
silkscreen of the man posing in a G-string. I forgot my sunglasses
and later, on the train, that was political,
when I studied every handsome man in the car.
Who I thought was handsome was political.
I went to work at the university and everything was
very obviously political, the department and the institution.
All the cigarettes I smoked between classes were political,
where I threw them when I was through.
I was blond and it was political.
So was the difference between “blond” and “blonde.”
I had long hair and it was political. I shaved my head and it was.
That I didn’t know how to grieve when another person was killed in America
was political, and it was political when America killed another person,
who they were and what color and gender and who I am in relation.
I couldn’t think about it for too long without feeling a helplessness
like childhood. I was a child and it was political, being a boy
who was bad at it. I couldn’t catch and so the ball became political.
My mother read to me almost every night
and the conditions that enabled her to do so were political.
That my father’s money was new was political, that it was proving something.
Someone called me faggot and it was political.
I called myself a faggot and it was political.
How difficult my life felt relative to how difficult it was
was political. I thought I could become a writer
and it was political that I could imagine it.
I thought I was not a political poet and still
my imagination was political.
It had been, this whole time I was asleep.

My eyes are polished smooth by sight, they clot like crystals in storm glass,
like my sister brewing beakers of toxin. If we had seen
what had been done, what the helicopter pilot did in our name,

what the special ops team did in our name, what they did
with their hands in our name. What if it were my sister,
what if it were her, what? If we had seen with our own smooth eyes.

Mark the diacritical, my lovely: we’re all wearing our knee-high boots,
every last one of us, we live in a booted nation. A nation girded and gunning.
This moment, this is precisely all, watching takes work, sight takes hours,

takes my eyeglasses, every last one of them, as if they were yours. You can see
there’s a sigh in our sight. What if it were my sister? What if it were,
what. What we saw ground into our eyes with the photos,

with the newspaper reports. What would I say, what can I say if,
what would I say if it were my sister, my own? With my own
beakers of toxin, my own boots, my own hands in my own name?

What half-blind is like:
like two microscopes in my head
each with differently stuck objectives.
They enable the small and the very small
and reduce everything else to blur and shade.
Yet you can train even this.
Train it to spot the shape of sharks’ teeth,
of which there are many samples and many shapes
but not as many as flecks of sand, pieces of shell.
I have hundreds plucked from the shore.
But in the same beach I buried a toy
and never found it again. A tiny toy:
articulate, a translucent man, a smallness
to whom the world was an unbounded wonder.
Blemished and damaged I would hold him up
and say He is broken and anyone who could see
would say He looks fine to me.
But they can see well, not finely.
Look at his face, etched and serrated
by that gargantuan saw.
The cracked shell of his translucent skin,
buried in rubble now, and those teeth,
all that remain of terrible and invisible jaws.

“What can or ought
the public care
about
the identity
of the portrait?”

said James McNeill.
Did he look down
from neutral heaven
on the dealer wearing
flannel plaid, adjusting

to my denim chair,
to make the arrangement,
pocket my check
in black and smudge and white?
The agents said

they could easily find it
if I had no carbon.
FBI with their silk knots
and sober suiting
just like the famous oil

though on different
body parts.
I could be
Mrs. Whistler,
but I was

the dupe,
eyes lowered,
the menswear pair
noble shadows,
tracking down

the evil and clever
eBay forger (not
the original cormorant-tousled Martinez
I thought I was purchasing
with his true (M) mark

from his 19th-century hand).
Inspectors with their pointed
interrogations — they were way
beyond clues — 
who when they left

would form, and be,
long shadows
at each end of day.
Make shapes you might assume
would fall

from mountain goats
in frightening terrain.
They reported answers
they knew all along.
Thigh-high in paintings,

I thought to wade out
with my honest eyes
so little notorious,
from mistaken
tonalists, expressionists,

Society of Six ...    
The crook posed in tartan,
I fine-tuned
to the agents;
he talked ordinary — that was my best judgment.

So what? He warmed, and got richer in,
my denim wingback.
I thought of Anna’s
stern profile; and were they
profilers?

And as they shook
my hand good-bye, I said,
Do your wives collect anything?
What do you think?
they implied.

Come in, come in. The water’s fine! You can’t get lost
here. Even if you want to hide behind a clutch
           of spiny oysters — I’ll find you. If you ever leave me
           at night, by boat, you’ll see the arrangement

of red-gold sun stars in a sea of milk. And though
it’s tempting to visit them — stay. I’ve been trained
          to gaze up all my life, no matter the rumble
          on earth, but I learned it’s okay to glance down

into the sea. So many lessons bubble up if you know
where to look. Clouds of plankton churning
           in open whale mouths might send you east
           and chewy urchins will slide you west. Squid know

how to be rich when you have ten empty arms.
Can you believe there are humans who don’t value
          the feel of a good bite and embrace at least once a day?
          Underneath you, narwhals spin upside down

while their singular tooth needles you
like a compass pointed towards home. If you dive
            deep enough where imperial volutes and hatchetfish
            swim, you will find all the colors humans have not yet

named, and wide caves of black coral and clamshell.
A giant squid finally let itself be captured
           in a photograph, and the paper nautilus ripple-flashes
           scarlet and two kinds of violet when it silvers you near.

Who knows what will happen next? And if you still want
to look up, I hope you see the dark sky as oceanic — 
          boundless, limitless — like all the shades of blue in a glacier.
          Listen how this planet spins with so much fin, wing, and fur.

They so liked breast milk;
Joanne fell asleep & leaked,
the ants woke up, made the sweet climb.

Others were surprised to find
acidophilus, Soledad cleansing
her inside sex — they made their way

across her ivory sheets while she napped.
Ah, the little guys were rejected
by our sisters. But still, I feel

sad that in my new lodgings there
are no more glossy arrowheads to follow,
sprinkle with baking powder,

make a pretty cayenne path for
over the once-food-strewn
sill (they scent our past).

They can carry
their groceries
bag-free: & ants shop

in the honey cupboard,
thirst
like black hair being washed

in a sink. Car-waxed
black traffic jam — that’s
actual jam, strawberry.

Once my curatorial staff.
But let them go on strike.
Those embodiments of intention;

they don’t sit around playing
cards; perhaps they never
play, never horse

around. Hard-to-see-in-the-dark
jet numbers
on the radio dial.

Perhaps there is no laughter
in their chasm. Serious:
but they’re able to stand up on hind legs — 

a darling trick.
I want to give them
a little inkwell. A beachball.

The number of communal legs alone
exceeds the stars
underground.

They could be an orchestra.
A single one looks in the mirror
& sees a note. A quarter note.

So many instincts
massing as one. If I miss one little lover,
do I miss them all?

I can’t leave my hurting skull
Or the rose apple opening inside me.

I’ll count the weeks, months,
Unfurling each numbered day in my hair.

Frost ribbons inside my brain,
Canals push up my leg.

I’m moving on
To what the world needs me to know.

I am the angel trapped inside the bullet.
I am the exit wound trapped inside the angel.

Am I the scarecrow
Perched at the end of the human trail.

I’ll palm cotton between my prayers
Until the universe has passed,

Waving down jellyfish
To volcano hours.

What force propels a bullet
From its chamber. Is it sourced by water

Trickling in a karst cave,
Or is it an angel’s gasp as she flees.

I can’t answer it all,
But my mask grows taller every year.

A snail sank — grand in puss and rime, on three coils (equals
one tea-wheel) white.
The wheel brings the bill, the bill — bald.

Everyone goes in for the table,
the tablecloth is of water. One says huh — one morning high on a grape I dropped off — a dunce — 
and exacted my height, and rightly so: it is a height I won’t have made alone.
It is a height erring on all sides.

The bride slip’n slides on her back to us — then on her head (a ball-point pen), quicksand in her hair.

A man beside her, his mouth is like a dark arch for her. My mouth is death to you!
In this new rhythm how can I say, how can I thank you, for I feel a blessing running through my tale now, it shines — 
intestines — that I will can.

She arrived at the country mansion in a silver limousine.
She’d sent out invitations and everything:
her name written twice with “&” in the middle,
the calligraphy of coupling.
She strode down the aisle to “At Last” by Etta James,
faced the celebrant like a keen soldier reporting for duty,
her voice shaky yet sure. I do. I do.
“You may now kiss the mirror.” Applause. Confetti.
Every single one of the hundred and forty guests
deemed the service “unimprovable.”
Especially the vows. So “from the heart.”
Her wedding gown was ivory; pointedly off-white,
“After all, we’ve shared a bed for thirty-two years,”
she quipped in her first speech,
“I’m hardly virginal if you know what I mean.”
(No one knew exactly what she meant.)
Not a soul questioned their devotion.
You only had to look at them. Hand cupped in hand.
Smiling out of the same eyes. You could sense
their secret language, bone-deep, blended blood.
Toasts were frequent, tearful. One guest
eyed his wife — hovering harmlessly at the bar — and
imagined what his life might’ve been if
he’d responded, years ago, to that offer in his head:
“I’m the only one who will ever truly understand you.
Marry me, Derek. I love you. Marry me.”
At the time, he hadn’t taken his proposal seriously.
He recharged his champagne flute, watched
the newlywed cut her five-tiered cake, both hands
on the knife. “Is it too late for us to try?” Derek whispered
to no one, as the bride glided herself onto the dance floor,
taking turns first to lead then follow.

Somewhere, people must still do things like fetch
water from wells in buckets, then pour it out
for those animals that, long domesticated, would
likely perish before figuring out how to get
for themselves. That dog, for example, whose
refusal to leave my side I mistook, as a child,
for loyalty — when all along it was just blind ... What
is it about vulnerability that can make the hand
draw back, sometimes, and can sometimes seem
the catalyst for rendering the hand into sheer force,
destructive? Don’t you see how you’ve burnt almost
all of it, all the tenderness, away, someone screams
to someone else, in public — and looking elsewhere,
we walk quickly past, as if even to have heard
that much might have put us at risk of whatever fate
questions like that
                                     spring from. Estrangement — 
like sacrifice — begins as a word at first, soon it’s
the stuff of drama, cue the follow-up tears that
attend drama, then it’s pretty much the difference
between waking up to a storm and waking up
inside one. Who can say how she got there — 
in the ocean, I mean — but I once watched a horse
make her way back to land mid-hurricane: having
ridden, surfer-like, the very waves that at any moment
could have overwhelmed her in their crash to shore, she
shook herself, looked back once on the water’s restlessness — 
history’s always restless — and the horse stepped free.

You swear the twin spirits
taught you to write.

At night, you climbed
the leaves to hear the gods.

Catch in the throat. Hollow breath.

       Paj is not pam is not pab.
    Blossom is not blanket is not help.

           Ntug is not ntuj is not ntub.
        Edge is not sky is not wet.

On sheet of bamboo
with indigo branch.

      To txiav is not the txias.
           To scissor is not the cold.

The obsidian mask
will make its own sleep,

leave behind the silver
your body won’t shed.

Now you are Niam Ntawv
who was once a young farmer

scrawling in secret toward
the triggering day.

When they could take no more,
when all that you had was given,

you lined your grave with paper.

Owl small be enough

The child for all his feathers was a cold.

Oh wow the owl.

The poem the vowels

The owl, look its vowels

That branch for you

Owl, are you an armature vector

And a large step for mankind?

Owl astronaut burgeoning owl is a gift

You give to me give to you

Terrible other things happen.

We stay on our branch.


A hundred eyes

Two will do

The bus arrives in the orchid heat,
in the place where coffee grows
like rubies in the valley’s black soil.
We disembark, walk in twos so we
don’t slip on the genesis mud.
The woman next to me carries
three cellphones as gifts for cousins
and a bucket of chicken to share.
How is it that I have come this far
with nothing, that I am empty-
handed in this country of blessings?
A procession of rust-colored macaws
glides above us. Their ashy shadows
draw crosses onto all of our heads.

The trees have sex,
Teach,
Focus.
Tohu Bohu
Chaos in a green light.
Alone again.
How alone I twist
at the end of thought
when illness is forgot
and the speaker


is punched on the bark
on the soft models.
The old abbot looked at us and laughed.
He loved electronic gadgets for his tomb.
You were as beautiful

as six almonds
as beautiful as
the naked foot
of the messenger of peace.

You sat in a corner of the page.

In a movie I have never seen: a small-town drunk
stumbles into a beam of light & wakes up convinced
he was abducted by aliens, convinced a hole opened in the sky
& swallowed him — said they did something strange to his body
some kind of experiment, said a hole opened, said cold light
cauterized him shut, redefined that red theory, chrome instrument
turned him into a skinless puzzle, a scrambled egg
sealed back into its shell. Madness, too, can be accumulative.
When my blood seemed uncontrollable, ran messy with pulp
down their fingers, my cousins finally left the room, laughing
closing the basement door behind them.

If time is an arrow, what is its target

If a Flexible Flyer is the sled I had as a child, when may I become a child again

Do you need help digging the potatoes out of your garden of insults

Do you plan to vote in the next election

Is our country headed in the right direction or the wrong direction
             and what did the bulldozer tell the yellow helmet’s ear

Which part of your body is like biting into a ripe peach
             which part shames you like a rotten banana

Would you like to find out how to lower your interest rate

When you go to heaven how old will you choose to be
             will you have cocktails on the well-watered lawn
                         where Bach conducts Bach

Will you still chase after the Grateful Dead

Is your life like air leaking out of a balloon, or like rain falling on a pond
            dot dot dot      dear pocks     pocking the surface     dot dot dot

Can it be like snow falling on the ocean

Can desire drown you like syrup over pancakes

When an ambulance siren wakes you at 3 a.m. do you feel relieved
            not to be strapped to that stretcher
                         speeding toward the grim unknown
                                       do you then snuggle next to someone

Are you satisfied with your detergent

Can you name a more perfect irony than the new world trade center, sacred icon of
            capitalism, revered lingam of profit, soaring above the memorial pools
                                        of people killed when the first towers fell

Can you describe the scent of dried blood

What about the smell of iron chains in your cell
             can you sing the threnody of the maggots

When I removed my mask did I frighten you
             like a drone crossing your sky

Are you satisfied with your auto insurance

When ecstasy approaches why do you resist
             What are you afraid of
                          Can you please unbutton your shirt now

Whether the rain on Mars was delicate or brutal

             whether it was blue or gray

whether it fell on bare rocks
             that remained bare
                          or on fertile ground
             that raised large forests of leafing trees

it could not last.

                          Mars froze eventually
in the same duration
                          that Venus by contrast
                                        bowed her burning head
             in noxious vapors and gas clouds.


•


On planet Earth meanwhile

                          after half a billion years
                                        of continuous volcano-havoc
                          meteor storms
             earthquakes               and lightning strikes

vapor stored in the atmosphere
                          eventually began falling.

                                        It soothed the fires.

When the fires died
             it fell silently on the first outcrops of moss.

                          On the tender grass with a sizzle.

             With more strenuous drumming
                          on the resilient fronds of ferns.

It became an orchestra of millions
             across the luxurious expanse of the tree canopy.


•


Then the sun wiped its forehead
                                       with long filmy fingers
and beamed afresh.

It worked through to creatures
                          flourishing beneath the canopy
             and persuaded them to
                                       interrupt their work
of scouring on all fours
             for delectable roots and berries.

In the clarified light
                          they stared at their hands.

They saw the wrinkled fingertips
             that gave them a firm grip
                          on slippery branches and vines
gradually smooth      and soften.

They rose in amazement
                          onto their hind legs
and crept from shelter
                          across the dazzling savannah.


•


After a summer of twelve thousand years

after the interruptions of ice

after one particular inundation
             and the shadow of an ark
                          darkening fish-shoals
as they scooted over hills and valleys

after the blaze of one civilization
                          then another

after the destruction of several experiments
                          with law and order

after the extinction
                          of many beautiful languages

rain by and large
             found its place in the scheme of things.

It began to defeat its purpose
             on the private sky of umbrellas.

It babbled through long green fields
                          and melted into the seams of poetry.

It larked in the puddle of its many names.

Cobblers and chair legs and pipe stems.

             Frogs and jugs and beards.

                          Cats and dogs.

Men.


•


Although they are shaped like a parachute
                          thanks to the air pressure beneath them
raindrops                     explode on landing.

Then the sun bears down again
             fitting his monocle into his eye.

             The glass flashes and burns.

                          The rain sweats
and evaporates into the ocean of its air.

             The ocean continues on its way
                          continually overflowing here and there
in quick little splashes
             or reckless floods and drenching.

It is delicate or brutal.

It is blue sometimes              and sometimes gray.

Sometimes it falls on bare rocks
             at others                     it raises
                          large forests of leafing trees.

I walked along Rue du Faubourg du Temple on the way to Belleville and I stopped at a shop selling rat poison. To my astonishment and my amusement they had a window full of stuffed rats, including four small rats standing round a table, playing cards. I liked that very much. Paris was full of weird turnarounds, it seemed — poisoning and elevating the rats to art at the same time. I nearly went in and asked how much the four rats and the tiny table would cost, but I remembered I’d be going back to Ireland pretty soon, and the people at airport security might not see the joke.

It was not the first time I’d seen rat poison on sale here. Paris seemed to have a problem with rats. Someone I’d met for lunch recently had said she’d seen them running around the Métro platform when she was coming home once around midnight. I remembered a rat had made a dramatic appearance in one of Baudelaire’s little poems in prose. A rich boy had lost interest in his expensive toy because he’d seen a poor boy poking a rat in an improvised cage. I’m pretty sure that wasn’t an invention on Baudelaire’s part — lots of poor parents probably thought of giving their children (or at least, their sons) rats as pets. Hadn’t I had a pet mouse myself? The rich boy who’d seen the rat certainly was delighted at the idea of having the creature as a pet.

Many years ago a friend of mine who worked as a chef gave me his original copy of Larousse Gastronomique — an edition first published in the 1920s or 30s. In there, I think, was a recipe called Cassoulet de Grand Souris. This was basically rat meat given the coq au vin or boeuf bourguignon treatment, i.e. cooked in red wine with mushrooms and tiny onions. I can’t remember which top Parisian restaurant introduced the dish onto their menu during the Siege of Paris in 1870–71, but apparently it proved very popular. It made sense too, as the Siege lasted for more than four months, and no meat was getting in, while rats were plentiful, then as now. I seem to recall the menus of the time sometimes also included rat salami, and a rat sauce called Sauce Robert. It’s no use looking in a current edition of Larousse as the book has been cleaned up — all mention of rats have been removed.

I had some experience of rats when I was a child in Donegal. I commonly saw water rats swimming in the stream or small river that flowed behind my primary school. The house I grew up in had rats under the floorboards. I used to love spending time under the stairs, and sometimes the rats would come in through a hole in the back. I don’t remember ever having been afraid of them but I never touched them or wanted them to walk on top of me. And I certainly never thought of capturing one and making it my pet. My little pink-eyed albino mouse was rodent enough for me, and even that was a trial for my mother.

I finally find the witch. She is branch-
boned, old, with knowing fingers.
She says nothing. Walks me to a tall tree,
a gourd hanging from a long line of jute.
She pulls out a phone, asks me to type
a note to my family. I do it, but can’t see
how it can be sent from somewhere
so deep. She scolds me, says that only
tourists think the world can be escaped.
The jungle’s green is the wild mind
of God. The witch puts the phone into
the gourd. Hand-over-hand, she raises
this cradle to the top of the holy canopy.

here was a rude boy on my jean jacket. black suit, shades and hat, skanking where orange street met birmingham. two-tone ska a second skin, a way to believe, though unsure why. days on this island with wasted republican frat boys and sorority girls, pompous u.s citizens, northern americanos with trust funds. only white dudes in sight without reagan hair are in the front of the car, a sputtering nondescript, and later pugs, the skinhead in boots and leather below unfiltered sun, unsure if peyote caps or heat is source of glistening blister of a head. an equally overdressed chubby blonde woman at his side who he swears sounds just like janis. on cue, val fills the hotel courtyard where my misfit crew hope for a corner of a floor not coated in puke or recent sex rented by bobcat’s brother’s sigma hate niggas fraternity. her dense wail careens off ten stories like a friday night public address system. so close to another why not join the hollow migration? us, funboy three, avoiding the same people in a different country. tequila, laughter and respect. then border patrol. stinking agave as he checks licenses and cargo space. when he opens the back door, rudy rests beside skinny black sophomore with a flat top. one front pocket open, the other concealing skunk. i consider what dank brick lines the cells, how long i will drink sweat because it tastes better than juarez prison chow. he reaches in the open pocket, returns rude boy to the seat. welcome home, boys. enjoy yourself, he says. it’s later than you think.

I was born in Speckled Eggs Garden.
I will die on Broken Egg Farm.
I’m hopping between them now,
I consider everything
to be friendly
and nothing dubbed.
I am a chick with legs
and yellow hair.
Oh Lord Almighty, creator of
all things beautiful and sick,
who prefers another life on top of this,
who are you to judge?
When Adam and Eve vanished
solemnly into the dark,
shrouding themselves in the forest,
I was timid and nibbling and
stayed behind, betrayed only
by the plucking of my beak
upon the ground you so graciously
provided (thanks).
I did noth with the best,
I am nothing now, do ye
noth with me or not?
Hear me now before I break
O Lord of the Margent,
Lord of noth and straw and all things
sent far, cheerio, sincerely,
I sleep on one leg too!

Who won? I said.
The game’s tomorrow, he said.
And I became the snail I always was,
crossing the field in my helmet.
But I’d given it my all,
while the plane arced on its way
to a landing, when I overheard
the woman behind us say
I was gathering wildflowers to make a wreath
to lay on my mother’s grave when my son
fell off a mountain in Italy
and I felt such joy over the unknown
outcome of her words
I was not ashamed,
for I can feign interest
in the world, just as she
in that great green meadow
must have.

My words were sent underground to where the toggle switch detonates.
That was the glare our voices were avoiding. There was something also


broken about the obedience of this retainer. The arcades weren’t
semaphores just because the arrows leading there facilitated those


of us in line as though reliant on east or west quadrants. The ticket
master was prone to elide requests from the travelers, the sliding doors


sounded a fanfare for the common man, get faster as thought, or mind
the gaps. What I infer can never altogether establish a space adequate


to the body count. The platform motivates two guardians who were
instructed in safekeeping to usher me from harm’s way but my stand


point so recedes from this tableaux as to acknowledge a footprint
perspective. Translucent envelope inside remaindered by the riptide


or such tunnel vision as to warrant arrest. Why I was sent to the nether
world inflicted with no wound. Someone lets fall a pair of zip locks


containing the pixie sticks of this conspiracy; what I had to say was
sent, I mentioned this I think already, underground switch and toggle


intended to ignite what I could never bring myself to mean. Where
the voices were avoiding me—hands outstretched at quarter day to hold


back the beam—was there something broken? I weather compliant. I rally.

Lit with strange carpentry magic — 
they build time-shares in her head. They carve
names deep in wood, erect beams of metal to hold up
the invincible defense of a bad history. They mourn
what’s subjective. They are shutters closed.
Sometimes I imagine such men in flip-flops
with fat towels draped over confident shoulders.
I imagine they all live in Texas, and find
South Padre too hot, and then I imagine them blaming
diversity for everything. Here, in the middle of grief,
we pout to the rhythm of their sentences.
Suns hiss in their dreams. Soon such critics will meet
daily for prayers. The Pharisees identify the guilty woman.
They are gathering sticks for a witch burning. Curandera
lit with the fire of sighs, casts spells, burns sage,
sweats in a lodge, her own prayers flaming.

Walking at El Pulguero,
a tarp shines
next to the dog track.
The dog track
a bowl similar to the Colosseum,
but with steel poles
subdividing the voyeurs
and attending bidders,
tickets yellow
and flapping in their hands.
Greyhounds on the billboards    ...    

I walk
under the stands.
Bracelets in a jumble
under the black-
marker-scribbled
advertisement brown board.
It exemplifies
the innocent
rebuttal to being cultured
by my particular country — 
the country of my birth,
though not quite my teaching.
The Cuba of the womb,
of the in-walking-distance-
of-the-beach land
in my memory, with shouts
beside our houses
at the corner belonging
to the distribution agency.
Fruits, mangoes, milk,
soy beef, when that traveled
our way, divided
and partitioned by an old
minibus with a man
in an apron and a smudged
baby blue shirt.
I remember soda bottles
being carried off
up our streets, but by who
I don’t remember.
Too vintage a memory
to properly retell.
Orangey glued to the burn
of sunset on time
that young inside — 

I as well draw from that
very same exclusion,
a pleasure from this participating
memory. My childhood was
a happy one, albeit
the pangs existed, sharp
like a battery, violent,
sorrowful, but elastic,
coming back at night home,
be it dark inside the house.

This indictment,
the personal exclusion goes
timid up my skin and neck.
            At the Pulguero
            or not, I’ll find
something to bother about.
It is that time, turbulent
and worrisome until later.
It is just not only this place.
And so I reap
             from the crystalline sky,
             the mangled trees,
             the faux marble and jet
             furniture with gold
             filigree forming a subtle
             Chinese dragon what I can.

The gold iron floor lamps.
The off-brand running shoes — 
Fila, but not really.

Always apart from what
includes me. Vaguely
includes me, is chummy enough,
falling out of the tether
when more incisive probing
corners along.

And so in my cooperation-
less demeanor, I shuffle
further into the flea market,
never benefitting
from the seductive resignation
of allowing everything
a true potential buying power.


•


The baby marmoset gurgles
when belly-rubbed.
Deserted by its mother,
the video lector tells us.
The YouTube bubble
incarnadine in the corner.
A hibiscus, a bee dropping
from its flight.
One dreams it could be
okay to keep the little monkey
for an alarm clock
in the a.m.

           A gang of marmosets
           intertwines among the branches.
           The ground heaves an ash coloring.
           I bogey my apprehensions
           on the little primates flinging.
           Bug-eyed, I read
           their spastic jerking
           as uncohesive
           with my stock of reality.


•


The stony wheel
gurgling in its solar
pickling. Moss
underhand, the water
running its cataracts
of limpid murk.
The wheel has cracks
in the stony center.


•


A frittata offered
to us by a resident.
He’s a culinary student.
It was surplus practice.
And oats on the bread
loaves also in the offer.

He’s a kind gentleman,
toughened by who knows
what. He’s staying here
at the shelter and
I’m too coward to ask
about his life.
Like a scouter of fumy
          billows,
we all happen upon
the hits which we must
report to someone.
And god knows how they’ll
take it.


•


I listen in
on the praxis applied
to the nexus
in accelerating,
intimate make-out
fondling.
I feel it with every
go at the mouth
and lips, teeth
testing their courtship
at submittal,
effusive biting.


•


The phone
shelly,
an onyx coat
          warm
in the jacket
pocket.

A regulator’s annual
finish
like a yearling
passerine
flickering
on the computer
          screen.

the union president’s dead
& they won’t let transgender

people pee in north carolina
& here i’m complaining about

climbing the mountain again
the mountain’ll always remain

if i’m lucky, to keep me from
sucking & only a king mule will

do. humbled by bill as he goes
through the business of staying

alive with dignified unconcern. i
don’t deserve him, have no zen

no dasein, just half-a-dozen self
-inflicted wounds i’m expected

to grin & bear & like robert
plant, i do. it’s like i’m in

a rembrandt or something
holding testtubes to the sun

to read my urine specimens &
—spoiler alert—i’m trigger sad

checked my email mid-poem
so of course its bad news

the ancient city is practically
gone, palmyra, palmyra

at least i still have bill
here in isis usa

They flared on the sea green
of the Subaru that seemed netted
under the unleafing maple,

a limestone moulage cut
from a quarry and cast
in immemorial arrest behind

Pete’s Absolute Asphalt truck,
throttling still when I alighted
and said, besides, in Aleppo once —

to nothing but the wind
photographed in sunlight;
the pavement’s watery brier

and children and their ghosts
and the air-raid screams of mothers,
once, in Aleppo, altered

that moment in history
when titihihihihi titihihihihi
those white houses,

stiffened with silence, broke
the private change, the public good
to dive into pits of leaves.

I like how the mallard ducklings
goofy and weak
waddle up the cement incline
then slide into this runoff
of lawn sprinklers and car washes
and how the great blue heron
seems to be teleported here
from the Jurassic
to look for extinct species of fish
but mostly I like the way
the little birds
fly in and out of the barbed wire
with only a smear of water
to keep them singing.

hangs in the closet
of this small room, collar open,
sleeves empty, tail wrinkled.
Nothing fills the shirt but air
and my faint scent. It waits,
all seven buttons undone,
button holes slack,
the soft fabric with its square white pattern,
all of it waiting for a body.
It would take any body, though it knows,
in its shirt way of knowing, only mine
has my shape in its wrinkles,
my bend in the elbows.
Outside this room birds hunt for food,
young leaves drink in morning sunlight,
people pass on their way to breakfast.
Yet here, in this closet,
the blue shirt needs nothing,
expects nothing, knows only its shirt knowledge,
that I am now learning—how to be private and patient,
how to be unbuttoned,
how to carry the scent of what has worn me,
and to know myself by the wrinkles

Balance is everything, is the only
way to hold on.
I've weighed the alternatives, the hold
as harbor: It isn't safe
to let go. But consider the hover,

choices made, the moment
between later and too late.
Hesitation is later, regret
too late. You can't keep turning
and turning, or expecting
to return. This earth

is not a wheel, it is a rock
that erodes, mountain by mountain.
And I have been too soft,
like sandstone, but there is a point
where I stand without a story,
immutable and moved, solid
as a breath in winter air.

I have seen my death and I know
it is my neighbor, my brother,
my keeper. In my life
I am going to keep trying
for the balance,

remembering the risks and the value
of extremes, and that experience
teaches the length of allowable lean;
that it is easier — and wiser —
to balance a stone as if on one toe
though it weigh a hundred pounds

than to push it back against the curve
of its own world.

I will hear his sleep
in and through my own, my sleep
will be bathed in his as if we slept
in one same fluid

My sleep floats within a listening
so deep that the separating
spaces of air become
as pliant and full as snowfall,
its singing silence as profound

My ears and his throat —
the sensation of anticipated
hearing close inside the ear
and the incipient murmur or cry
forming at the end of his sleep —
borne like birds and thrumming
on the air of rooms between us

My own sleep will be his
clock, safely keeping time,
his sleep tunes my dreams to listen,
our sleep binds the hour,
heavy and warm,
into a blanket of air
and sound

It was twilight all day.

Sometimes the smallest things weigh us down,
small stones that we can't help
admiring and palming.

Look at the tiny way
this lighter vein got inside.
Look at the heavy gray dome of its sky.

This is no immutable world.
We know less than its atoms, rushing through.

Light, light. Light as air, to them,
for all we know. Trust me on this one,
there is happiness at stake.

Boulder, grain. Planet, dust:
What fills the stones fills us.

I remember, or I have a feeling,
I could be living somewhere with you,
weighted down the way we aren't now.

Often the greatest things,
those you'd think would be the heaviest,
are the very ones that float.

It's hard to tell
that the face of the moon
is as much like a man's
as god's. Out yonder,
in the world without us,
who's to say? —
Either we get in the way,
or things make use of us.

Half-way around the globe
from where they started,
the static sound of starlings
echoes off the barn roof.
Spider weave in the spokes
of wheels, and stars
circle unsuspecting suns.
Little do we know,
the world has a talent
for making itself at home.

Meanwhile, we paint our self-
portraits on everything
imaginable, then hold
them up like mirrors.
Our mercurial brushes
grow longer, our skills
more acute. Dust clouds
the vision, tinder
to the eye. So we burn
trees to save the forests, burn
air to fly afar. We do, we say.
We can. The time

is close at hand. Time was
(said a man)
 you could tell the weather from the moon.
That was before another
broke   the quicksilver distance
and walked all over it.
Now you can't tell a thing.

Borne forward by extended increments.
                       Crawling waterward from this weed wilted shore.

Like small furred voles skittering inward, taking little
                       grounded, mirrored steps: Like this, intervals of ice

ridge and rime the pond rim. By night. As if
                       by dreaming ice might cast its million limbs

over that surface above. Its frozen tincture
                       outfolding farther, farther unfurling across. By dawn:

The moonspread scales then a foregone conclusion.
                       Constructed, transmutable truth: All day ice

shrinking from the light, reconsidering.
                       And still, in leaving, leaving its lingering

doubt, pale shadow of wingspan edgebound.
                       Near. Then again in dark the cold falling, fallen

to glow on the meniscus, ice groping forward with more
                       sliding white. Ice: Its own logic, growing:

Its horizontal precipice. Its glass
                       carapace. Night's cold and hoary

frost. Vaster still till all its heirs' outstretched
                       tips interslip, imprint with their ferny whorls

an entire span between lands.
                       To travel that unthinkably far! And then, having reached

to cry out more room!—crack
                       like a shell, heave between its crushing shores.

But which pressing which? And what boundary
                       divides water from ice, what self

solidifies against self, which is water—host or
                       whore? Ice now in spring dissolving, dissolute

reversal by increments retreating. Not I,
                       alive, here mudnudged under eaves, forming

my young egg by egg, mother's lasting bequest.
                       To nest once in heat. To hatch and be born.

Going down the escalator
of the subway, I glanced across
and saw on the escalator's partner
rising up
someone who looked a bit like you but with hair
not so soft and clean and warm as yours
brushing against mine
on those rare occasions
when inadvertently our foreheads
neared, making me wish it to stay.

We were not physical lovers
and never could have been.
But we were close. Moved three states away,
married happily or not, you are now
only a person I may hope to meet
momentarily, and not really then: merely
in my mind, because of what I chance to see.
But I am not unhappy about this
or think that I am not. Because of your hair.
Because of your beautiful hair.

They are dying out and I want to reach them before they are gone
Not that I know what I would say to them when I get there
Their songs rippling beneath temporary sky
As I approach, as I am doing now
Even though I am nowhere near wherever they are
Swirling in blossoming dust and dreaming they are not

They are dying out and I want to reach them before they are gone
Just as I want to reach myself before I too am gone
Another blossom sliding into slime
What notes do I hear drenched in fiery sky
Are these ghosts rising up before me
Or gasps of dust near a lake covered by algae

They are dying out and I want to reach them before their names vanish
Before they become ghosts dying in pink algae and ruined vowels
Not that I know what their songs say
Telling sting of monstrous human torrent
Wheeling above burning story of lost lives
Tapering branches of smoke, red and yellow leaves falling

They are dying out and I want to reach them
Before my name joins theirs in plastic matrimony
Before a blue-eyed undertaker powders my nose
Or I turn to powder in squirt gun of unprofitable insects
Secrets folded away never rinsed in scum corner
History erasing traces of its nothing new

Plows have piled a whitened range—
faux mountains at the end of our street,
slopes shrinking, glazed, grayed. Fog
rules the day. In woolly air, shapes

stir—slow cars leave a trace
of exhaust, careful walkers share
loud intimacies. My mother's birth
slides across a calendar. Like

a stranger who jumps off a bus,
crosses tracks and strides toward us,
memory parts the sodden gloom

of our winter, as though, today,
only she can see where she
goes and track where she's been.

When you step through
the back door
into the kitchen
father is still
sitting at the table
with a newspaper
folded open
in front of him
and pen raised, working
the crossword puzzle.

In the living room
mother is sleeping
her peaceful sleep
at last, in a purple
robe, with her head
back, slippered feet
up and twisted
knuckle hands crossed
right over left
in her lap.

Through the south window
in your old room
you see leaves
on the giant ash tree
turning yellow again
in setting sun
and falling slowly
to the ground and one
by one all the questions
you ever had become clear.

Number one across:
a four-letter word
for no longer.

Number one down:
an eleven letter word
for gone.

My eye climbs a row of spoilers soldered
into ailerons, cracked bay doors haphazarded
into windows where every rivet bleeds
contrails of rust. An hour ago, the doctor’s wand
waved across my chest and I watched blood
on a small screen get back-sucked
into my weakened heart. It’s grown a hole
I have to monitor: one torn flap
shuddering an infinite ellipsis of gray stars
back and forth. You’re the writer, the doctor said
in French. Tell me what you see. Easier to stand
in a courtyard full of tourists scrying shapes
from this titanic Rorschach. Here’s a pump stub
shaped like a hand; something celled,
cavernously fluted as a lobster’s
abdomen. How much work
it must have taken to drag these bits
out of pits of flame, from lake beds
and rice paddies, and stack them in layers:
the French planes heaped beneath
the American ones, while the Englishwoman
beside me peers into this mess
of metals, trying to isolate one image
from the rest. Ski boot buckle
or tire pump, she muses at me, fossilized
shark’s jaw, clothespin, wasp’s nest?
According to the camera, it’s just a picture
changing with each angle, relic
turned to rib cage, chrome flesh
to animal: all the mortal details
enumerated, neutered. I watch her trace
an aluminum sheet torched across a thruster
as if wind had tossed a silk scarf
over a face. If she pulled it back, would I find
a body foreign as my own entombed
in here, a thousand dog tags
jangling in the dark? I tilt my head: the vision slides
once more past me, each plane reassembling
then breaking apart. Spikes of grief—
or is it fury?—throb across the surface.
Everything has a rip in it, a hole, a tear, the dim sounds
of something struggling to pry open
death’s cracked fuselage. White sparks,
iron trails. My heart rustles
in its manila folder. How the doctor smiled
at the images I fed him: A row of trees, I said,
pointing at my chart. Stone towers,
a flock of backlit swallows—
                                                          Now I kneel beside a cross
of blades on which the Englishwoman
tries to focus. Do you think I’ll get it
all in the shot? she calls as she steps back.
Steps back and back. Something like a knife sheath.
Something like a saint’s skull. The sky
floats past, horizon sucked into it. She won’t.

It is important to remember that you will die,
lifting the fork with the sheep's brain
lovingly speared on it to the mouth: the little
piece smooth on the one side as a baby
mouse pickled in wine; on the other, blood-
plush and intestinal atop its bed of lentils.
The lentils were once picked over for stones
in the fields of India perhaps, the sun
shining into tractor blades slow moving
as the swimmer’s arms that pierce,
then rise, then pierce again the cold
water of this river outside your window called
The Heart or The Breast, even, but meaning
something more than this, beyond
the crudeness of flesh, though what
is crude about flesh anyway, watching yourself
every day lose another bit of luster?
It is wrong to say one kind of beauty
replaces another. Isn’t it your heart
along with its breast muscles that
has started to weaken; solace
isn’t possible for every loss, or why else
should we clutch, stroke, grasp, love
the little powers we once were born with?
Perhaps the worst thing in the world
would be to live forever.
Otherwise, what would be the point
of memory, without which
we would have nothing to hurt
or placate ourselves with later?
Look. It is only getting worse
from here on out. Thank God. Otherwise
the sun on this filthy river
could never be as boring or as poignant,
the sheep’s brain trembling on the fork
wouldn’t seem once stung
by the tang of grass, by the call
of some body distant and beloved to it
still singing through the milk. The fork
would be only a fork, and not the cool
heft of it between your fingers, the scratch
of lemon in the lentils, onions, parsley
slick with blood; food that,
even as you lift it to your mouth,
you never thought you’d eat. And do.

“Naked woman surrounded by police”: that’s one way
to start the poem. But would she mean anything
devoid of her context, in this case a lushly
late-August deciduous forest, some maple,
mostly oak? She carries no prop—for example,
no bike chain, which the cops could be sawing
from the tree trunk that she’s wedded to her body.
But let’s start with her pure, and untranslated,
as the famous cartoon of the door is a mystery
until we post the word LADIES at a point that would be
four feet up from the ground if this door
were not drawn two inches tall—it’s us,
you see, who make believe it corresponds
to a “true-life” human door. Does it help
if I say the naked woman is “really” my true-
life friend, she of the tangled dago surname
we don’t need to get into here? And if I say next
that she has been swimming—in Lake Tiorati—

you can see how straightaway the tangling subdivides
into (a) where the hell is Lake Tiorati?
and (b) why naked?—to the last let me answer
that it’s 1978 and she is twenty; at college
she’s been reading Simone de Beauvoir and learning
words like patriarchy and oppression.
And these have been Mixmastered into her thinking
even about swimsuits—i.e., that not to wear one
is to rip the sign off the door and stomp it
underfoot. When she lies on a rock
the last thing she expects is the tingling
she feels now against her wrist, from a guy
peeing brazenly at her perimeter. This
is an impasse whose bud she thought she had nipped
by aggravating her muscles into interlaced mounds
so her body resembles a relief map of the Appalachians.
In whose northernmost range this story unfolds
& hence the much-delayed answer to item (a), above.

“Naked woman dadadadada police”: not a story but words
at the end of a chain whose first link is her realizing
that the Puerto Rican kids across the lake
splashing and whooping are not having fun—
though this is the sign that she’d stuck on their door.
No, there’s another word for the kid
slapping his palms on the water:
Drowning. Even the urinater abruptly stops
his stream and stumbles back from her, ashamed.
And because she’s the one with the lifeguard build
and because all the guys are much too drunk,
without even thinking she finds herself paddling
toward the spot these kids are now screaming Julio! at,
where she draws a mental X upon the water.
Of course, it is a fantasy, the correspondence
that would make a drawing equal life, and so
you understand how amazing it is, when she dives
to the bottom and her hand happens on the child.

Perhaps what she expected was for the men on shore
to pay her no mind, as in Manet’s Déjeuner . . . :
the naked woman sits among them, yet she is a ghost.
But the kids keep yelling Julio! even after
she’s hauled the wet one out, the one
she points to: Julio okay. No, they shriek,
Julio otro! words she knows just enough Spanish
to know mean there’s another Julio in the lake.
Whom she cannot save despite her next round of diving,
which lasts until the cops come hiking down the trail
in their cop shoes. Then she comes ashore
and stands shivering among them, telling the story
calmly enough until she ends it with: for Christ’s sake
can’t anyone give her a T-shirt? They’re staring
as if somehow she’s what’s to blame, seeing a naked
woman, not the miracle. Which is, of course,
the living boy, that with these words—Julio otro!—
we manage to make sense to anyone at all.

I quit med school when I found out the stiff they gave me
had book 9 of Paradise Lost and the lyrics
to “Louie Louie” tattooed on her thighs.

That morning as the wind was mowing
little ladies on a street below, I touched a Bunsen burner
to the Girl Scout sash whose badges were the measure of my worth:

Careers . . .
Cookery, Seamstress . . .
and Baby Maker. . . all gone up in smoke.

But I kept the merit badge marked Dangerous Life,
for which, if you remember, the girls were taken to the woods
and taught the mechanics of fire,

around which they had us dance with pointed sticks
lashed into crucifixes that we’d wrapped with yarn and wore
on lanyards round our necks, calling them our “Eyes of God.”

Now my mother calls the pay phone outside my walk-up, raving
about what people think of a woman—thirty, unsettled,
living on food stamps, coin-op Laundromats & public clinics.

Some nights I take my lanyards from their shoebox, practice baying
those old camp songs to the moon. And remember how they told us
that a smart girl could find her way out of anywhere, alive.

Word of it comes whispered by a slippery thin section
of the paper, where the models pantomime unruffled tête-à-têtes
despite the absence of their blouses.

Each year when my familiar latches on them so intently
like a grand master plotting the white queen’s path,
like a baby trying to suckle a whole roast beef,

I ask: What, you salt block, are you dreaming
about being clubbed by thunderheads?—but he will not say.
Meanwhile Capricorn’s dark hours flabbed me,

uneasy about surrendering to the expert fitter
(even if the cupped hands were licensed and bonded)—
I had August in mind, seeing the pygmy goats at the county fair.

Now the sky is having its daily rain event
and the trees are having their hibernal bark event,
pretending they feel unruffled

despite the absence of their leaves. And we forget how they looked
all flouncy and green. Instead we regard
fearfully the sway of their old trunks.

Tonight I'm coming home in a coma if it fucking kills me.
Listless but relieved, beaming like a newborn hostage.
Orphaned by an ambulance. I got this new black eye just for you.
Your hopeless romantic now helplessly rheumatic.
Poets grinding teeth to powder. All my vowels are getting lost in the gauze.
Misinterpret courting for the cursing of a drooling fool.
Here's to cheap sex and codeine in a hospital bed. And maybe I'd object, if I felt at all alive.
Everybody's dying to lay down with you. I got the order all wrong.
I must have bumped my head. Maybe I should quiet down.
Don't bet on another blackout. I'll be all right. There's an army at my window waiting to lose this fight.
I'm the king of this all night clinic. The fucking champion.
Tonight we'll feast like royalty in traction; happy and meticulous.
There's a delicate love song in this; kicked out and dripping in verse.
Go get your gun because God won't show. He sent a poet instead.
The Don Quixote of the ICU. Quite impressive for a cripple. Munchhausen by proxy of a muse.
Tempt not a desperate man. This split lip is for you. I traded it for an outdated tooth.

This isn't at all unpleasant. I'm enchanted by the lavish ballet,
And I'll whistle the tune all the way to the gallows that I heard at the cabaret.
At the sheriff's signal, the orchestra moves the floor.
Don't it make you feel wonderful?
Body twisting strictly ballroom. Criminally elegant, ideal postured Viennese waltzer.
I'm dressed to kill. I'm weightless and well rehearsed.
In my godless opera my character is canonized.
Uphand me. This is a musical and nothing goes wrong.
Can't keep the classics out of the head of the masochists. Strike up the band.
It's 245 beats for a measure or 5 beats per 6 steps on alternating feet.
The show must go on. Never mind the teeth and fingernails, the show must go on.
I don't feel at all like I thought I would, but I could probably go on like this forever.
Tonight, we dance, for tomorrow they release the dogs. 1,2,3. Keep it up.
1,2,3. Savor it.
(Where is my head? Where is my heart?) Everything vanishes.

What we're doing is so wrong, and what you're wearing is so right (it's so tight).
But I've never felt better so I'm going out to get her and I don't care what set of wheels I steal to get there.
Balance is a minor setback.
What she thinks is all right, and the way she looks is just fine.
She sure as hell ain't you, but lord knows she'll have to do.
She don't know I'm alive but neither do I so there's nothing left to lose.
If I could only make it make you want to want me. One more drink, I think, should do.
I wish that I could say I love to watch you walk away, but you probably
Won't be back in time to hear it.
So it's just as well. No one out there gets back in alive.
So I'll love the way you stand so close to a guy who we both know can't get near it.
Strike when ready. Burn the highway down.
Let me hear her high heels moan. I'm ready, set, go.
There's cocaine in the key that took us from the bar to her car to the bedroom.
Only the lonesome love us. Only the careless can handle us.
What's wrong with us that we're so unamused?

Turns out I never had a thought at all.
I've been talking in my sleep, reciting teleprompted anthems -
A marionette strung tight to the executives upstairs.
I almost had myself convinced that I meant everything I said. What a shame.
Oh captain, my captain, you've been drinking. What happened?
I've been slurring my cadences and blacking out when I stand.
I know all about your son, who never did return from the war.
But there was poison in that bottle, I tell you.
(1, 2, 3, 4)
Tell the tower I've been hijacked
Tell the gunman this vehicle's been stolen
I'm coming out with my hands in the air. This is not my voice.
What you are hearing is not me.
There's been a horrible mistake. I'm a proud God-fearing registered democrat.
This is all the same elaborate scheme and it will be cleared up when the governor beckons for me.
He'll clear my name. It appears that the inmates have overrun the asylum.
There's a madman at the wheel. We are not even remotely capable of keeping our heads about us.
We've abandoned all semblance of presence. Dead bolted, buckled in. Keeping our word to the sinking ship.
Let the rats orchestrate the new mutiny. I'll meet you overboard.

Cut your break lines, brake your headlights and waited for you at the stop sign.
Disconnected iron lungs, insurance fires, our smothered young.
Always the first one on the scene. A pyromantic midsummer nights dream.

Thank you lord:
1) for this oil slick.
2) for her car wreck.
3) for I'm lovesick.

Heaven sent us a hero, but Hell tried to his resolve. And when you thought we were done for.
I pulled through. While you rested your eyes in the driver seat, I sat and watched you.
Always the first one on the scene. A pyromantic midsummer nights dream.
Trust me.
We'll wait for it, pray for it, step on the brakes till we're over it, under it, screaming like bombs for it.
Oh dear me, I've done it again.

Thank you lord:
4) for the loaded gun.
5) for the bad aim.
6) for I'm lonesome.

God is smiling down on us, he shines his grace on everyone.

[p.s. - The greatest lovers were murderers first.]


To my mistress the bridge, I don't feel well. I'll be leaving and you can't stop me.
We've been carrying on too long.
I'm sorry, but I'm gone. I've got a bad reputation to think about. I've been dirty, I've been wrong.
Maybe someday they'll find that I've washed up.
I'm stepping out to clear my head. I'm breathing in to fill my lungs. We're all dead.
Farewell scenic highway overpass.
It's better this way anyways. My lover the river makes a better soldier than a bride.
But I left my heart at the side of her bed and she's got the warmest body that I've ever had.
Drain the lake, you'll find it's full of love.
Bring the children to the water and let them see what heartache did.
This matrimony needs a witness, and you can teach them to swim.
Don't let your dreamers grow up to be dead men. Drown us at birth, save her some time.
Drifting on romantic holiday, breathless as her cold arms cover me. Drag the lake. You will find it is full of love.

-Sincerely mine. Finally.

Boys: shoot to thrill from the hip. This time we put the "act" in action.
We've tricked the pigs into thinking that this auction is a pageant.
In no time there will be makeup on our new set of cutlery.
The livestock is star struck. They're all salivating like ravenous cartoons.
Goddamn animal. You'd better watch where you spit.
Squeal like soft music. If it helps, we'll dim the lights on the floor.
Neon bulbs are the cosmetics of swine.
Everybody looks quite dazzling, trussed up in their formal attire.
You'd make a great secret if I could keep you, but we all spill our guts.
We're locked and loaded. Drip fed and bloated.
Our trigger fingers snagged in the mouse trap of the moment.
Turn the lights off on us, like a moth left in the cold. In the dark, begging for more.
When the urgency strikes you, you'd better not lose your nerve.
It's the rush that the cockroaches get at the end of the world. It's alright.
There's a pail by the bed if you need one (but you're doing just fine).
When in Rome we shall do as the Romans, when in Hell we do shots at the bar.
Last call, kill it.
We don't think in terms of the morning afters, and we don't utter a single word of the night before.
In the meantime we're just thoughtless incessant buzzing apparatus.
Disillusioned and lonelier than the last man standing. It doesn't get any better than this so run like Hell.
This is a rock and roll takeover.
Living each day one night at a time.
There were mercy fucks, there was blood.
You should have been there by my side.
This is passion, this is red handed denial.
I have no lover and she hasn't the prettiest eyes. Last call, kill it.

No man abandon his post. A gatecrasher has called us to arms. Take up your torch.
I want this ship cleaner than a hospital ward. A radical has polluted our ranks.
Slouch into position men, this is a war. Set the traps.
We'll have that criminal's head marched through the streets on a stick.
Someone will pay for this.
We'll squeeze his goddamn brains out.
Sleep with one knife open. You can't outthink us, we've been out of thoughts for a while.
The warrior with the deadliest weapon is the one without an instruction manual for his gun.
This is a union of dunces and we are the new global menace.
Stalking the land, gnashing dull teeth, tapping our feet, sighing and humming and watching the clock.
That's what you get for fucking with us.
When we find you we will skin you alive, we'll pluck out your eyes
And the cannons will roar as we march to the capitol, dragging your hide.
Drooling polished jackboot monsters, tracking the scent of a sleeping child.
Your composure gave you away, next time it's best to cry havoc.
Keep marching, the bridge is ours. They're coming to get me. They're coming to take me away.
I'll never make love in this town again. Everyone on the dance floor is doomed. Hit the ground. Shut your mouth.
The prisoners have laid waste to the pulpit. You're in for it now. Are these helicopters for me?
Have I been appointed to speak? Then I'm going to Hell, and I'm taking the renaissance with me.


Tonight the cinema's the treatment clinic where the perverts seek the cure.
Show me the rape scene one more time for the cause.
And I promise we'll behave like perfect Christians.
We'll sing the glory of the gospel for some whiskey and a skin flick.
Hallelujah.
All rise. Hallow be my name. In this kingdom we came without calling.
Hallelujah.
The violence and the choir, the virgin and the fire. Up to her neck in tongues.
Lovely, so lovely is Ludwig Van. Electronic sonata pumped through the mud of a one-night stand.
The saints in regalia whistling while they rape. Lid clamps in vitamins.
Lift up her skirt and I'll be cured, like a junkie with a methadone addiction thinks he's clean.
I'll be cured.
Sit down and watch closely. All these whores have conceded the war.
She said, "you might be sick, but you feel alright to me."
That's enough. Turn it off. I promise I'm better. It's too much. Healed at the horror show.

The famous Polish poet calls Simone de Beauvoir a Nazi hag
but to me she will always be her famous book,
the one with the Matisse paper cut on the cover,
a sad blue nude I took into the woods.
Where we college girls went to coax the big picture
from her, as if she could tell us how to use
all the strange blades on our Swiss Army knives—
the firewood we arranged in either log cabin or tepee,
a little house built to be burned down.
Which could be a metaphor:
Simone as the wind puffing the damp flames,
a cloud with a mouth that became obsolete
once we started using gasoline. Still,
she gave me one lesson that sticks, which is:
do not take a paperback camping in the rain
or it may swell to many times its original size,
and if you start with a big book you’ll end up
with a cinderblock. In that vein I pictured Simone as huge
until (much later) I read that her size was near-midget—
imagine, if we took Gertrude Stein, we’d be there still,
trying to build some kind of travois to drag her body out.
The other thing I remember, a word, immanence—
meaning, you get stuck with the cooking and laundry
while the man gets to hit on all your friends in Paris.
Sure you can put the wet book in the oven
and try baking it like a cake. But the seam will stay soggy
even when the pages rise, ruffled like French pastry.
As far as laundry goes, it’s best I steer clear,
what with my tendency to forget the tissues
wadded in my sleeves. What happens is
I think I’m being so careful, and everything
still comes out like the clearing where we woke.
Covered in flakes that were then the real thing:
snow. Which sounds more la-di-da in French.
But then the sun came up and all la neige vanished
like those chapters we grew bored with and had skipped.

So today, yet another Guyanese will try to run the border
dressed in a dead housewife’s hair—all they’ve recovered
since her disappearance in a downtown shopping mall.
An “incident,” the paper says. Another “routine occurrence”—
wresting my trust from the publicans
assigned to keeping us safe, whole. Rather:
vow to stay vigilant against the maiming
that waits in each landscape, even in this
mundane procession of muddy spring days. To see
the tenacity of rooted hair for what it is:
an illusion as fleeting as courage. To keep the meat
between one’s ribs from being torn, to keep the hard
marble of the cranium covered with its own skin.
To stay vigilant. To watch the signs of violence stirring
even in one's own machine. To keep both breasts
attached and undiseased. To keep the womb empty;
and yet to keep the organs living there
from shriveling like uneaten fruit, from turning
black and dropping. And not to mistake the danger
for a simple matter of whether
to put the body on the streets, of walking
or of staying home—; there are household cleansers
that can scar a woman deeper than a blade
or dumdum bullets. The kitchen drawers are full of tools
that lie unchaperoned. Even with the doors and windows
bolted, in the safety of my bed, I am haunted by the sound
of him (her, it, them) stalking the hallway,
his long tongue already primed with Pavlovian drool.
Or him waiting in the urine-soaked garages of this city's
leading department stores, waiting to deliver up the kiss
of a gunshot, the blunted kiss of a simple length of pipe.
But of course I mean a larger fear: the kiss
of amputation, the therapeutic kiss of cobalt.
The kiss of a deformed child. Of briefcase efficiency
and the forty-hour workweek. Of the tract home:
the kiss of automatic garage-door openers that
despite the dropped eyelid of their descent do nothing
to bar a terror needing no window for entry:
it resides within. And where do we turn for protection
from our selves? My mother, for example, recommends marriage—
to a physician or some other wealthy healer. Of course
it’s him, leering from his station behind her shoulder,
who’s making her say such things: the witch doctor,
headhunter, the corporate shaman, his scalpel
drawn & ready, my scalp his ticket out.

In the perfect universe of math it’s said
the world’s eternal aberration.
In fact, we should be less than dead,

math itself disrupted for matter ever to be read
as real. A thought so hard to fathom that The Nation
in its article on math has said

we lack the right imagination: the human head
will not subtract itself from the equation,
zero out the eager ego to be less than dead.

Did the numbers hunger for mistake, for fun upend
themselves to recalculate our infinite extinction?
And was existence meant for all, since it could be said

without our numbers others might have thrived:
the black rhinoceros, shortnose sturgeon—?
Articles of horn and scale both less and more than dead,

figurative dreams that now haunt us in our beds.
Memory’s another flaw in our equation. Was it The Nation?
I forget. Regardless, I know that someone said
in a perfect universe, we’d all be dead.

In Phnom Penh’s museum, the skulls are stacked
in aquarium tanks: grim toys for hooks to ply
free from the rubble. Here, each one gets a tag,
a mount, a photograph to suggest a life,
perhaps a name, might be envisioned. Yet I’m
more moved by what’s anonymous, past; imagine
fields of faces sunken with decay, eyes
jellied in their sockets, heel meats bruised,
bloated in the rain—
                                        Perhaps the skulls prefer
a lack of names as, scrubbed of self and skin,
they’re trauma’s best witnesses: fused
by time and pain to one crisis, never
to be separated. Lost as men, they become event.
in this, they achieve a terrible transcendence.

Women who sleep on stones are like
brick houses that squat alone in cornfields.
They look weatherworn, solid, dusty,
torn screens sloughing from the window frames.
But at dusk a second-story light is always burning.

Used to be I loved nothing more
than spreading my blanket on high granite ledges
that collect good water in their hollows.
Stars came close without the trees
staring and rustling like damp underthings.

But doesn’t the body foil what it loves best?
Now my hips creak and their blades are tender.
I can’t rest on my back for fear of exposing
my gut to night creatures who might come along
and rip it open with a beak or hoof.

And if I sleep on my belly, pinning it down,
my breasts start puling like baby pigs
trapped under their slab of torpid mother.
Dark passes as I shift from side to side
to side, the blood pooling just above the bone.

Women who sleep on stones don’t sleep.
They see the stars moving, the sunrise, the gnats
rising like a hairnet lifted from a waitress’s head.
The next day they’re sore all over and glad
for the ache: that’s how stubborn they are.

A woman ladder leans
with her two-year-old boy in her arms.
Her arms & legs & hands & feet
are thin as crayons.

The man ladder
is holding his glass of bourbon,
he is coming out of the child’s drawing
in his old open pajamas—

he’s in the war. The sky
is blackest crayon-canyon.
When does he leave again? When he leaves,
I leave.          I like that river the sky.

When I first heard you on the phone
your voice had to be that '40s wartime voice
for it to get under my skin like it did,
after seven years asleep.

You’re at the beginning of something, you said,
and I’m at the end of something;
but you didn’t go away,
twice-born, three times, coming around,
rough cello.

                                   Late days
I want to drive to your grave,
But I don’t belong to it.

The helicopter,
a sort of controlled silver leaf
dropped lightly into the clearing.
The searchlights swung, the little girl,
the little girl was crying, her mother, a girl herself,
was giving birth, the forest dropped birdseeds of milk.
Then the helicopter lifted away,
the mother rested.

                                   Like him who came to us empty-handed,
who came, it seemed, with nothing,
Joseph Cornell—          making
a shoebox universe to put it all in.

I lay down under language
it left me and I slept

—You, the Comforter, came into the room

my blood, my mouth
all buttoned away—

Makers of houses, books, clothes-
makers, goodbye—

fluid melodic
getting more and more drastic

the moment she gives in to him
she regrets it

a throat   a chest

trying to press themselves




a current of air
air through the mask

all the flourishes in the world

the fingers, the foot
trilling, the breath keen

responding to recitative
closing and opening

out from the head
with the hands

carry it through the aria
carry it through the chorus

when finally does, waltzes
a solo but not alone




“let's waltz a rumba"

never gives in to the waltz
never embellished

motifs, mimetic, sign language
as clear gesture

displacing singers
he likes this sound

muted and pronounced

effort of error
she likes this sound
weight, irrepressible

effort of eros




they talk about their differences
w/out trying to change or be changed

regretting herself

where do we meet each other

w/out trying to hang or be caged

The dead say little in their letters
they haven't said before.
We find no secrets, and yet
how different every sentence sounds
heard across the years.

My father breaks my heart
simply by being so young and handsome.
He's half my age, with jet-black hair.
Look at him in his navy uniform
grinning beside his dive-bomber.

Come back, Dad! I want to shout.
He says he misses all of us
(though I haven't yet been born).
He writes from places I never knew he saw,
and everyone he mentions now is dead.

There is a large, long photograph
curled like a diploma—a banquet sixty years ago.
My parents sit uncomfortably
among tables of dark-suited strangers.
The mildewed paper reeks of regret.

I wonder what song the band was playing,
just out of frame, as the photographer
arranged your smiles. A waltz? A foxtrot?
Get out there on the floor and dance!
You don't have forever.

What does it cost to send a postcard
to the underworld? I'll buy
a penny stamp from World War II
and mail it downtown at the old post office
just as the courthouse clock strikes twelve.

Surely the ghost of some postal worker
still makes his nightly rounds, his routine
too tedious for him to notice when it ended.
He works so slowly he moves back in time
carrying our dead letters to their lost addresses.

It's silly to get sentimental.
The dead have moved on. So should we.
But isn't it equally simple-minded to miss
the special expertise of the departed
in clarifying our long-term plans?

They never let us forget that the line
between them and us is only temporary.
Get out there and dance! the letters shout
adding, Love always. Can't wait to get home!
And soon we will be. See you there.

I was already an old man when I was born.
Small with a curved back, he dragged his leg when walking
the streets of Copenhagen. "Little Kierkegaard,”
they called him. Some meant it kindly. The more one suffers
the more one acquires a sense of the comic.
His hair rose in waves six inches above his head.
Save me, O God, from ever becoming sure.
What good is faith if it is not irrational?

Christianity requires a conviction of sin.
As a boy tending sheep on the frozen heath,
his starving father cursed God for his cruelty.
His fortunes changed. He grew rich and married well.
His father knew these blessings were God's punishment.
All would be stripped away. His beautiful wife died,
then five of his children. Crippled Soren survived.
The self-consuming sickness unto death is despair.

What the age needs is not a genius but a martyr.
Soren fell in love, proposed, then broke the engagement.
No one, he thought, could bear his presence daily.
My sorrow is my castle. His books were read
but ridiculed. Cartoons mocked his deformities
His private journals fill seven thousand pages.
You could read them all, he claimed, and still not know him.
He who explains this riddle explains my life.

When everyone is Christian, Christianity
does not exist. The crowd is untruth. Remember
we stand alone before God in fear and trembling.
At forty-two he collapsed on his daily walk.
Dying he seemed radiant. His skin had become
almost transparent. He refused communion
from the established church. His grave has no headstone.
Now with God's help I shall at last become myself.

Most of what happens happens beyond words.
The lexicon of lip and fingertip
defies translation into common speech.
I recognize the musk of your dark hair.
It always thrills me, though I can't describe it.
My finger on your thigh does not touch skin—
it touches your skin warming to my touch.
You are a language I have learned by heart.

This intimate patois will vanish with us,
its only native speakers. Does it matter?
Our tribal chants, our dances round the fire
performed the sorcery we most required.
They bound us in a spell time could not break.
Let the young vaunt their ecstasy. We keep
our tribe of two in sovereign secrecy.
What must be lost was never lost on us.

My love, how time makes hardness shine.
They come in every color, pure or mixed
gray-green of basalt, blood-soaked jasper, quartz,
granite and feldspar, even bits of glass,
smoothed by the patient jeweller of the tides.

Volcano-born, earthquake-quarried,
shaven by glaciers, wind-carved, heat-cracked,
stratified, speckled, bright in the wet surf—
no two alike, all torn from the dry land
tossed up in millions on this empty shore.

How small death seems among the rocks. It drifts
light as a splintered bone the tide uncovers.
It glints among the shattered oyster shells,
gutted by gulls, bleached by salt and sun—
the broken crockery of living things.

Cormorants glide across the quiet bay.
A falcon watches from the ridge, indifferent
to the burdens I have carried here.
No point in walking farther, so I sit,
hollow as driftwood, dead as any stone.

my husband thinks we have too many chairs in our house. I know
we need more, my friend has enough chairs, many many more than
we have. I told my husband: chairs, picture frames — they are the same.


when my friend and her husband have talked about looking for
a different place to live, one with space for the families of their
six children, he says, "but I want this view." on the interior walls,
facing away from the sea, are paintings of this view — "well, it's not
exactly our view, but close" — taken somewhere on this small stretch
of land near the lighthouse, the painting of their house really of
the one next door, a corner of their house visible in the background
(receding in the perspective). in the Whistleresque painting, the house
next door is a train rushing forward through the night fog.

Though it may haunt us
And break our hearts
Death cannot tear us apart

I'll wait for an omen
A sign that I'm chosen
Then I'll crack that reaper safe with my bare hands
A trespass
My horror was holy
When I robbed two early graves I was sick with grief
Bruised deep

The desert was lonely
I either took a leap of faith or I jumped ship
I admit I offered my only just to crash those pearly gates
Hands up, hands up

Heaven's been raided
Creator, created
Heaven's been raided
Creator, created

I am sorry, it's not right
But you are mine to sacrifice
I was hopeless, I was tired
And we all kill to survive.

(I'm sorry)
Sacrifice
(I'm so sorry)
Kill to survive

I am sorry, it's not right
But you are mine to sacrifice
I was hopeless, I was tired
And we all kill to survive

Sacrifice
(I'm sorry, I'm so sorry)
Kill to survive
Sacrifice
Kill to survive

Though it may haunt us
And break our hearts

Death cannot tear us apart

So long to young love I've anchored my heart
Farewell to small joys I've burned down the bar
I'm changing my name so I don't do no harm
Some say it's vanity, some say its charm

No levels, still the same old devils

Frightened of fear, a servant of time
Kidnapped the queen, I have angered the hive
Snuffed out the stars with celestial winds
Ended a cycle that started again
I stopped going out, they kept coming in
Was I saving my soul or saving my skin?

No levels, still the same old devils

Can't hold it close, can't let it go
Prisons in basements in slick model homes

I'm just a day-tripper on sacred terrain
My transformation went from mangled to tame
I don't feel different but I don't feel the same
I'm afloat with an ear to the ground
I built a fortress with some books and a phrase
I felt some heat so I came out of the haze
I saw the end and I was truly afraid
I have begged but I'm still not allowed

It's a trap, lay the bait, catch the rat
It's a trap, lay the bait, catch the rat

Flew home and left the unknown in the lurch
Kept finding bodies, I called off the search
Went to a hymn from a funeral dirge
Church in the hospital, dog in the church

No levels, still the same old devils

Shepherd me back, this time I know
I don't know nothing, I'm not in control

Mindful but gutless

There's no need to panic
No need to panic

Go, what are you scared of?
All will be lost anyway
I see no good reason to wait
I will meet you...

There's a light where you go

Don't let a missed exit haunt you
There will be no air to breathe
A helplessness like you would not believe
I will bring you...

There's a light where she goes
All is right where she goes

Stay if you think we could pull through
A curse is the strongest there is
And calm collects what is his

I tried to plead with your machines
I'm at the feet of your machines
Tell me anything at all

If it's a false alarm then forget what I said
If the snake wont bite then I take it all back
If there's wine in that bottle than bring me the last
Holy crow it don't taste so bad

I've gotta plead with your machines
I'm at the feet of your machines
Tell me anything at all

The sun is out
Out cold

When everybody gets a universe
They do what they want
I'm gonna need another universe
I tore mine apart

When everybody gets a universe
They can do what they want
I tore mine apart

Try to speak to machines
Try to plead with machines

Pull me from the ledge
I hear them, they're praying

I have widowed every woman from the waitress to the queen
Been in and out of wedlocks with an exoskeleton key
I may perish unwept, but at least I'll never swing

I ain't in your crystal ball
You won't remember me but you'll remember our song

You got premonitions, talked to spirits, they approved
That just might mean you're lying or them spirits lied to you
Nothing more is perfect, yeah, but nothing less will do

I ain't in your crystal ball

You looked at what the light shined on not where it's shining from, didn't you?
You find what you need only when you need to find it. Yeah, I did it too

I knew I was alive because I used to want to die, but not anymore
Now I'm trying to be but old hearts won't let me sleep. I hear them in the floor

Standing at the altar with your leather jacket on
Fucked up on some new pills, got you feeling twenty-one
My friends are always pissed off, all your friends dance just for fun

I ain't in your crystal ball

I won't be here for that hangover, but I'll come running to raise a glass
Where'd I get my nerve? Oh, I thought you'd never ask
We clean the slate just to write mistakes, an old flame you can't blowout
You filled the cup, you picked me up, now you've got to put me down
Oh, now you've got to put me down

Explosion from the bottom of a well
Thin walls harsh winds
I tried to tap a deeper, brighter vein
But I'm back in old skin again
Pale stone
I am out of blood
Left in the chapel by a thousand other things I could've loved
But barely touched

We used to talk to God with acid on our tongues
We were divine when we were drunk
Before the world put out the fire and fed us crumbs

Chasing bended light
I went missing on the roads that wind through the corners of your eyes

Barbarians
Guard yourself with laughter, numb the meaning with the word
Barbarians
We tamper with a down machine but know it cannot work
Barbarians

We had such promise until we broke our promises. [4x]

Why can't it be the year two thousand?
I want to live in the year two thousand
When I was dumb enough to truly believe

Why can't it be the year two thousand?
I want to live in the year two thousand
When having nothing meant having everything

No one is taking my calls anymore
I can never get through
Acknowledge me you motherfuckers
I am cold and I'm blue

You savages
Barbarians

I didn't want to join your stupid cult anyway

I'm joining a cult, joining a cult, joining a cult
Cut off my hair, clean out my head, fill me with song
Scrap obstructed eyes
Leave my friends behind

Say I'm free. Say I'm free. Say I'm free and I am
Say I'm free. Say I'm free. Say I'm free and I am

Reverse the poles on the magnet
Pierce the armor of habit

I'm joining a cult, joining a cult, joining a cult
Cut off my hair, clean out my head, fill me with song
Willing to surrender to persist
Empty stare and dumb shit eating grin

Teach me to breed, don't let me think
Break me in half
Teach me to breed, don't let me think
Teach me to breed, don't let me think
Wipe out my past, break me in half

We're gonna get carried away

New clothes! New home! New job! New god!
From faith to doubt
I'm hardwired to short-out

From parts unknown,
To streets paved in gold
Left on the rooftop
Token in hand
I'm stuck here in neutral
I don't understand

Drink up. Drink up. Drink up. Drink up
Drink up!

Teach me to breathe, don't let me think
Wipe out my past, break me in half

I'm joining a cult, joining a cult, joining a cult

I brought a rumor when I came down from the mountain
That spread quicker than the fire in your eyes
Heaven won't let me in, I took my medicine
Salt water couldn't quench my thirst at the fountain

Burn slow, there's no rush
You're right, always right

I want oblivion all the time
Mindless son of the eternal shine

It snuck up like a desert wind
I got a feeling I won't feel again
When faith abandons me
I hope it does it honestly

I still howl like an animal in the darkness
And I'm reminded by the blood on my clothes
I can't stand what I've become
I'm shivering to spite the sun
We come together and were overwhelmed by the loneliness

I want oblivion all the time

Burn slow, there's no rush
You're right, always right

I thought I settled my debts that night on the ride home
But I have still got hell to pay

Help!
It has gone black. The sky is black. Earth is frozen and black
The moon is black. Snow is black
Her eyes, when open, are black. Light is black. Leads are black
The wires that run from them are black
Stars are black. Time is black
But the thought of death is soft and clean and beautiful and white

It's the purest of the drugs
'Cause it's everything at once
What if meaning never comes?
And I was just someone to fuck?
All of life, beginners luck?

What becomes of all creation if the smallest prayer is firmly answered "no"?
The greatest of the floods
There's a vacuum where the brightest future was

I'd better warm up my gun in case love is not enough [2x]

What haven't I done? What have I done? [2x]
What haven't I done to deserve a cold war on all sides?
It's so bleak all the time

"Stay with me. You're alone in the center of hell. Just be."
The longest winter I have ever seen
From hospital to hospital. Repeat

First I need to save the life of god
So, that god can come and save me from myself
If I have to walk alone I'm giving up
I can't stay here knowing love is not enough
If I have to walk alone I'm giving up
I can't stay here knowing love is not enough

Untimely ripped into this world
I was born again as a girl

I feel alright but I'm buried alive.
Nothings healed, just covered by time.
I want to pray but I think I'm possessed.
Constant cardiac arrest.
I'm standing in the way again.
I can't see the road ahead.
I have taken too much.
Once a ladder now a crutch.
When all of it is closing in, stop fighting and hold your breath.
So much self-love, so much hate.
Fuck these people.
Fuck this place.
But to an amateur set of eyes, me and the lord look a lot alike.
I might even have a brilliant shine and the strength to make it right.
Unbroken, unscarred.
Back ain't weak, hands ain't hard.
It's the first night in town.
Our first night in town.
Rain comes down, bridge goes out.
The same way its always did.
Now that I'm yours, discover me.
Now that I'm yours, unbury me.
Now that I'm yours, amaze me.
Go ahead and save me.
Go ahead.
When all of it is closing in, stop fighting and hold your breath.
Don't take it back, you're all that I have.
A new goddess emerged from the mist and took the blade from my wrist.
Don't blink back out.
I will aimlessly wander this wasteland guided only by a sickness, not a purpose.
I can't go back to what I was: Metallica without the drugs.
A faith healer without the plant.
Theres no home for a hollow man.


I can't continue on without a sign
One wing to haul the weight of only one third of an eye
The voice I'm leaning into has been thrown
When all the meat is stripped away I'm chewing on the bone

I'm condemned until the moment I forget
That I haven't learned a goddamn thing yet
My soul is sticking out like a talon through a shell
You can wait until the rapture I will hightail it to hell

Water everywhere but no water fit to drink
I've got endless proof and I don't know what to think
Nothing but time, not a minute left to spare
Gallons of fuel, I can't get anywhere

When all I am is a stone that says the name I had and the years that I had been,
The quiet depths and the measured steps won't echo like the shriek of riot did

Sever the anchor you drag or be frozen at the stake
Choke down all the prey in your path before you become the prey
No one likes a company man
Nothing but a snake, nothing but a snake

Look at my war it's the prettiest thing alive
I traded it for sanity now all you see is mine
Open the throttle, feel the thunder in the sails
Pick up the scent of fear and follow the trail

When all I am is a stone that says the name I had and the years that I had been
The quiet depths and the measured steps won't echo like the shriek of riot did

I can't move the dredge without heat
Still water of a puddle and the ocean never meet
I've wandered off a path into a storm
A trance into a fury, a mantra for a sword

Doomed until I recall how to fire up an engine that has stalled
I would trade what I have lost for the things that I have left. Some clarity just to see darkness best?

My flower in your barrel hasn't stopped the slaughter yet

So spent, we can't be saved
We lost sleep but we found our way
Sharpen your axe against the road
Don't hold out hope

Such courage pulls us down. We ride on
Such courage pulls us down. We ride on

Our songs refuse a grave
These beating hearts make violent waves
Push the pedal right through the floor
Want so much more

When all I am is a stone that says the name I had and the years that I had been
The quiet depths and the measured steps won't echo like the shriek of riot did

Creeping up a wall of glass
I'm entirely made of sand
Lurching up. Feeding back
What the canyon wants, the canyon gets
And the canyon craves an apology and a pound of flesh

I thought I felt
I thought I saw
I thought I knew
So much chatter

Let there be shade
Un-illuminate
Nothing will change
If you don't lead with your shadow

Let there be shade
Un-illuminate
Exhale the plague
Cloud your vision

An unpainted corner
My kingdom come
Silence tells me I can't escape it

Now we write our names on the moon in blood
I have set us back twenty centuries
All the letters sent with no address
Is he talking to or talking down to me?

They'll kill us
They'll kill us
They'll kill us, if they have the chance
I hear their conversations
They'd kill us if they had the chance
I'll be the first to take it

I still feel like someone is watching
Though I'm not sure if that someone is listening
It don't matter much to my suffering
Because I know for a fact no one's answering

Let there be shade
Un-illuminate
Nothing will change
If you don't lead with your shadow

I was on the shoulders of leviathans
But I couldn't see through the fog of anger
And I failed myself like I did before
My work is lost. All my reckoning
Back to sin. Back to shame
Back into the quicksand

Guarding an empty house
Guarding an empty house
I have lost everything I had found
Sorrow will overcome
Sorrow will overcome

Melt the glaciers inside my veins
Thaw my eyes, crack the glaze
Trapped under ice at a fathomless depth
But I know I exist I can see my breath

Come up to the surface, the ice age has passed
Hallelujah, it is over at last
A new day will follow a nuclear blast
Hallelujah, it is over at last

Crossed the great divide
To sleep where most would die
I'm on the lam for a fire theft
I wasn't here, we never met

Our shadows spread forever but they don't weigh anything
Shake it off
I can't ever go back but I will take it when I leave
Shake it off
I'll be waiting with a suitcase when the devil comes for me. Shake it off

One if by land, two if by sea
Life isn't ours, we are property of life
Life isn't ours, we are property of life
So, take what you can when you can while you can

Stare at the sun
Look directly into the sun
Stare at the sun
Look directly into the sun
It's over at last

Am I the only one that saw the sun burn out?
The locusts keep their rhythm
My watch is broken down
I wake up and take on water, sink to the peak of despair
What I need is a cigarette
No more prayers

The planets unaligned
We are saints without a shrine

A storm comes and the city's abandoned
The ship is going down with the captain

I am the man that sank Atlantis
The bottom is not the lowest we get
Further down still the dark's absolute
Further down than that, it's only me and you

I assure you that hell is not a myth
We both vacation there
Hell is not a myth
We spend each winter there
No one can prepare

A storm comes and the city's abandoned
The ship is going down with the captain

I am the man that sank Atlantis
The bottom is not the lowest we get
I thought I knew the best part of the secret:
The truth is the thing we forget

The glory I had witnessed was just a sleight of hand
These hearts cannot be salvaged, these bones cannot withstand
I have either been forgotten or I was never seen
Now I'm in the negative space between

I've weighed down the earth
Through the stars to the pavement
I've weighed down the earth
No use trying to save it
I've weighed down the earth
Through the stars to the pavement
I've weighed down the earth
Not sure I can take it

I've fallen out of frame
A strangled, distant flame

Clenched in the jaws of anguish are only godless men
Chaos is drawn to silence like life is drawn to death
The dusk is so much clearer than the dawn had ever been
I'm a ghost, and yet I've weighed down the earth
Through the stars to the pavement
I've weighed down the earth
No use trying to save it

Got me a voodoo doll [2x]
Untouched, I'll feel it all
Got me a voodoo doll

Show it hell, I've seen it
Take its hope when I need it
I'm breathing for it

Cut it up
I'm dislocated
I'm coming apart
Put it up to the flame
My flesh is charred
Make it feel so ashamed that I wear the mark
I will suffer if it gives you the strength to come back out
Black out

All my bad luck
Got mixed in with your blood
It poisoned our apple
My past life's contagious

Take me instead [2x]
Your place for mine [2x]

Got me a voodoo doll [2x]
Untouched I'll feel it all
Got me a voodoo doll

I'm of no consequence [2x]

The cut's infected and I cannot hunt
I am no provider
On barren land
All we do is want
The cut's infected and I cannot hunt
Bow to the great divider
We scattered her
All we do is want

Everything's coming up roses
Are we expected to feast on a flower?
Everything's coming up roses [2x]

Erase all the bastards, that gripped her, the vultures
And your sad eyes, that don't flicker
Protect her [2x]

Turn the world into the wild

There is nothing outside but a mirror and the sky
You're a dream in a dream, you're the only one alive

Try bursting the clouds
Try not making a sound, or leaving the ground

So much space
And all I paint
Are all your spills
Our black waves

I used to go easy
Yeah I noticed all the beauty
Now it's bent
It's all heavy
Reflector [2x]

But the magic isn't real, til the magic is gone
If the flame was eternal, then it won't be for long

There is nothing inside, but a mirror and a light
You're caught in between
[?]

I'm setting sail but I'm still as the wind doesn't blow
I'm waiting for a train, I don't think it'll show
I'm at party but there's nobody here that I know

I've called together every wolf in the Arctic, then I cried wolf, I cried wolf
I built a house on the grave that you haunted, then I shook, I got shook
I've called together every wolf in the Arctic, then I cried wolf, I cried wolf
I built a house on the grave that you haunted, then I shook, I got shook
I lit a match and threw it into the garden. Yeah and it took, oh it took
Somebody tell me if I'm dear and departed, I can't look, I can't look

Try bursting the clouds
Try not making a sound, or leaving the ground

All I create is empty space
Empty space, empty space

Cheer up
Have you ever thought of smiling more?
You look so good
Try smiling more

with ragged beats & the beats
are too beat to live so the graves push out with
hands that cannot touch the makers of light & the
sun flames down through the roofs & the roots that slide
to one side & the whistlin' fires of the cops & the cops
in the shops do what they gotta do & your body's
on the fence & your ID's in the air & the shots
get fired & the gas in the face & the tanks
on your blood & the innocence all around & the
spillin' & the grillin' & the grinnin' & the game of Race
no one wanted & the same every day so U fire &
eat the smoke thru your long bones & the short mace
& the day? This last sweet Swisher day that turns to love
& no one knows how it came or what it is or what it says
or what it was or what for or from what gate
is it open is it locked can U pull it back to your life
filled with bitter juice & demon angel eyes even though
you pray & pray mama says you gotta sing she says
you got wings but from what skies from where could
they rise what are the things the no-things called love
how can its power be fixed or grasped so the beats
keep on blowin' keep on flyin' & the moon tracks your bed
where you are alone or maybe dead & the truth
carves you carves you & calls you back still alive
cry cry the candles by the last four trees still soaked
in Michael Brown red and Officer Liu red and
Officer Ramos red and Eric Garner whose
last words were not words they were just breath
askin' for breath they were just burnin’ like me like
we are all still burnin' can you hear me
can you can you feel me swaggin' tall & driving low &
talkin' fine & hollerin' from my corner crime & fryin’
                                                                            against the wall

almost livin' almost dyin'
almost livin' almost dyin'

In inaccurate skin,
among hologram trees,
fresh from the tundra of dreams,
I hear public television say
that Jesus was trilingual.
Billie Holiday sings
the loss of plotliness,
the loss of onomatopoeiabreath.
Doris asks if I’ll touch
her titanium humerus—I do.
I go to Sheboygan to stand in
Emery Blagdon's "The Healing
Machine," which was brought in
pieces from the Nebraska Plains.
Its coffee can klieg lights' grace
and copper wire sculptures
leave burns all over me.
Death is like Russia:
beautiful, cold, expansive,
expensive. Ephesus says:
even marble turns to chalk.
Aldebaran is nearing
the end of its life.
Jupiter and the moon are
the closest they'll be until 2026.
It's 25-below wind chill. Winds
push iced piers into houses.
My wounds smell like strawberries.
Jim who once saw a UFO
and was too tired to tell anyone,
who rode a tiger, and
slept with his cornet's mouthpiece
stenciled on his lips, was a lifelong
Indiana water garden gang member,
Jim who delivered a baby
from my body, Jim, impresario
of poems, parking tickets, and
sky-blue hydrangeas, Jim who
"wore a crown of snow,"
Jim's ashes change the garden.
Who can sleep with banded
Jupiter so close to the moon?

There’s trouble on the mountain
And the valley’s full of smoke
There’s crying on the mountain
And again the same heart broke.

The lights are on past midnite
The curtains closed all day
There’s trouble on the mountain
The valley people say.

When I am a toddler, a child, a tween, a teen, and a young adult, I am called an ancestral soul, a ti gran moun, a little old person.

Adults study me and decide that I am wise beyond my years, mature for my age, emotionally ripe. I am told it is unusual to meet a five-ten-fifteen-year-old girl who does not slouch or mumble or speak in monosyllables.

When I do the things that come naturally to me—when I hold my spine up erect, when I wait my turn to speak, when I speak having listened, carefully, when I enunciate, when I look grown-ups in the eye—I am told I must have “been here before.”

"How do you know?" one college professor asks me after she has seen a psychologically violent play I have written at age nineteen. "How do you already know?”

In high school, I charm my teachers. They encourage me to write speeches about feminism that I recite for International Women's Day at City Hall or deliver as part of conference panels at local universities. “If you were older," they tell me, "we would probably be friends.” One of them even flirts with me.

Among my peers I exist somewhere between amicably mysterious and irrevocably dorky. The popular kids greet me in the hallways, but they never invite me to their beer-drenched parties. I will never play Spin the Bottle. I will never play Seven Minutes in Heaven. My mother tells me she is protecting me from boys, but the truth is, after I do my homework, she wants me to type up another family friend’s résumé or resignation letter. At home, I am a bridge, a cultural interpreter, a spokesperson, a trusted ally, an American who is Haitian too, but also definitely American.

The children of immigrants don't get to be children. We lose our innocence watching our parents' backs bend, break. I am an old soul because when I am young, I watch my parents' spirits get slaughtered.

In Haiti, they were middle class. Hopeful teachers. Home owners. They were black like their live-in servants. They donated clothes to the poor. They gave up everything they knew to inherit American dreams. And here, they join factory lines, wipe shit from mean old white men's behinds, scrub five-star hotel toilets for dimes above minimum wage. Here, they shuck and jive and step and fetch and play chauffeur to people who aren't as smart as they are, people who do not speak as many languages as they do. In the 1980s, they are barred from giving blood because newscasters and politicians say that AIDS comes from where they come from: Haiti, the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, a black magic island that spawns boat people and chaos, a place of illiterate zombies, orphan beggars and brazen political corruption.

When I am a child, my childhood is a luxury my family cannot afford. Their dignity is not spared, so my innocence is not spared. They are humihated and traumatized daily, so I become a nurse to their trauma. I am told too much, so I know too much, so I am wise beyond my years.

When I am six, my mother tells me she found out she was pregnant with me at age nineteen, she “tried to kill the baby." She says "the baby," as if it isn’t me she’s talking about; as if I am not the expensive, scandalous daughter who forced my way into her world despite the abortion-inducing herbal teas she drank and her frantic leaps off of small buildings.

When I am sixteen, my father calls me on the phone to, inevitably, weep. He says, "Living in this country, I have learned not to hope for things. Only you are my hope. Only you."

So—yes, I grow up fast.

If anybody made a movie out of my life
I wouldn't like it, but I'd watch it twice
If they halfway tried to do it right
There'd be forty screen writers workin' day and nite.

They'd need a research team from Uncle Sam
And go from David Allen Coe to Billy Graham
It would run ten days in the final cut
And that would mean leaving out the gossip smut.

And I do request for my children's sake
Don't ever let 'em do a new re-make
The thing I'm sayin' is, don't you see,
Don't make a movie 'bout me
Even for T.V.
Don't make a movie 'bout me.

Don't let 'em drag old Hickory Lake
For my telephones and bottles and roller skates
Down forty feet in the Cumberland mud
There's a rusty old gun that once shed blood
Out a hundred yards from my lakeside house
Weighted down with a rock is a skirt and blouse
A dozen pair of boots that made a dozen corns
Trombones, trumpets, harmonicas and horns
And the tapes that I threw from the lakeside door
Silverstein, and Kristofferson from years before
Everything has a story that should be let be
So don’t make a movie ‘bout me.

If they're hot on a book called Man in Black
Tell 'em I've got the rights and won't give back
If you don't know my tune you can't get it right
I don't talk about me in . . . Man in White.

Truth, said the Master, cannot be hid
But he didn't say slap it in the face of my kids.
A stone is a stone and forever a stone
But I'm part good and bad and then I'm gone.

There is no sin cleaner than the dirtiest
So there's a lot about me that I don't want missed
If it's days or years or whatever will be
Don't make a movie 'bout me.

Aw, I might as well face it cause they will some day
So while I can I've got a thing to say
I don't know anybody that I said I don't know
And there ain't anybody anywhere I owe

The I.R.S. gets the lion's share
And what is left goes to my own named heirs.
Don't let 'em make it in Hollywood
If they must, tell 'em Arkansas is where they should.

Here’s a hex on whoever makes it be,
So don’t make a movie 'bout me.
For Love or Monee
Don't make a movie 'bout me.

but lake winds pick him up
& blow him into the clouds. I
married a dreamer. I wait. He
stops to listen to the early
lilac orchestra. He starts to
change into blowy horizontal lake
rain, then migrating red admirals.

I thinksay remember. I remember us.
We chose the imaginal
north/south somewhere
between Bartlett Avenue and Jupiter,
between Lake Michigan and
the Aegean. Remember we drink
Serbian Cosmos together, we eat
squash blossoms and red snapper soup.
We visit the Calatrava before bed. We
nurture a magnetic field of words. I am

remembering you back. Remembering
plays time. Thinking is all remembering.
I remember our young
bodies. I'm not finished
with us. Remember that.
If someone asks, "why is that lady
out walking in that lake storm?" Tell them
"months ago her husband went to the
store in a blizzard & never came back."
Tell them: "She can't stop looking for him.”

How do you feel about me
Now that you've learned to know me?
Why don't we both admit
That something is happening.
And we would feel better if
We'd just tell each other
No need to keep it to ourselves.
Let's put it to music
Let's put it to music
Let's sing about it
Laugh about it
Clap our hands
And shout about it
Let the whole world hear it
In a sweet, sweet melody
Let's put it to music, you and me.

I wake to money, and take my money slow
I watched for money, lights turned low

One must have a mind of money . . .
Money that is not there and the money that is

The art of money isn't hard to master
. . . The money surrounds us . . .

Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet money
Money on a wet, black bough

Do not go gentle into that good money
The pure products of money go crazy

Money sweeping out from us to disappear
Oh Money! My Money! our fearful trip is done

I myself will die without money
Money, Money, you bastard, I'm through.

the children of haiti
are not mythological
we are starving
or eating salty cakes
made of clay

because in 1804 we felled
our former slave captors
the graceless losers sunk
vindictive yellow
teeth into our forests


what was green is now
dust and everyone knows
trees unleash oxygen
(another humble word
for life)

they took off
with our torn branches
beheaded our future
stuck our breath up on pikes
for all the world to see

we are a living dead example
of what happens to warriors who
in lieu of fighting for white men's countries
dare to fight
for their own lives

during carnival
we could care less
about our bloated empty bellies
where there are voices
we are dancing

where there is vodou
we are horses
where there are drums
we are possessed
with joy and stubborn jamboree

but when the makeshift
trumpet player
runs out of rhythmic breath
the only sound left is
guts grumbling

and we sigh
to remember
that food
and freedom
are not free

is haiti really free
if our babies die starving?
if we cannot write our names
read our rights keep
our leaders in their seats?

can we be free? really?
if our mothers are mud? if dead
columbus keeps cursing us
and nothing changes
when we curse back

we are a proud resilient people
though we return to dust daily
salt gray clay with hot black tears
savor snot cakes
over suicide

we are hungry
creative people
sip bits of laughter
when we are thirsty
dance despite

this asthma
called debt
congesting
legendarily liberated
lungs

You and I on the boat notice
the print the whales leave,
the  huge ring their diving draws
for a time on the surface.
Is it like that when we
lose one another? Don't
know, can't. But
I want to believe
when we can no longer
walk across a room
for a hug, can no longer
step into the arms of the other,
there will be this:
some trace that stays
while the great body
remains below out of sight,
dark mammoth shadow
flick of flipper
body of delight
diving deep.

Insect lust or insect love. There's no telling them apart if you're not a
bug. But from down here I can see the gears the guts of the watches, molecular
tiers. Now if you're a bug in insect love then you only do things with other
bugs. But if it's lust (and survival is a must) then the things that you do are
to other bugs. There are laws built into the nest and this is the crux of it.
But how do you apply this to the world? We are given too much room to be
expected to do only good. We are more curious than bold and we were quiet
before we went cold. Animal art or animal shit? Boot legged thoughts or
collegiate wit? It all looks the same if it ain't holy writ. But from up here I
can see the gears, where the guts of the clocks mimic heavenly spheres. Our
mathematics and our faith are just ways of devouring space while we continue to
devolve. Separate hearts are the whole of the law.

Old black tusks ripped off of the beast at the bank of the swamp and carved
into statues of arthritic Gods or the handles of blunt swords that you'll one
day run upon, with your eyes covered in moss. Shot down in it's sleep. The big
game of the world wide garbage heap. You mounted it's head on your wall. The
prize? Hollowed out eyes, mold in the cracks of it's skull. The fur is matted
with blood and it's tongue wet with mother's milk. Gates opened wide and bedlam
came. Wise men were forced into a layman's trade. With nothing but time, chaos
reigns. A great quiet has followed you to here. A blustering wind with nothing
of worth in it's heart or hands. Your legacy is "a dull catalogue of common
things." You've never even seen the blood you've drawn or looked in the eyes of
the kill you claim was yours before taking your picture with it.

I need a new rock bottom. I've got to find a beloved back alley. I'm bored
as hell in Sodom and Eden is just another dry county. The local haunts have
been blessed, all their spirits dispossessed. Even our bed is the second best
and the end isn't near it is now. These drugs won't even bring me down. I wanna
dance but I don't hear a sound. You can't fuck when your friends are around but
my slow death drew a crowd. Can't take two sins off of one ox. Pile them on
because she won't spare the rod. You don't drown faster the deeper you sink so
you best make peace and take in the sea. Nurse that stray black dog. Stay low.
Keep digging. Divine light continued to shine for so long that the battery died
and no spark can be seen in my eyes so it waved death down. The rapture came
and it went while my faith was treading cement. I'm hell bound but I'm heaven
sent so I'm lifted back into the ground. I've ascended back into the ground.
There was whiskey in the Devil's blood and there was blood in my cup so I will
make me a better grave. I will find my own way.

I'd rather beg your forgiveness
Than solicit permission
I'd rather know that it broke your heart
Than doubt that it will

Every time we divide
We put zeroes under the line
And we publish it as our proof
That nothingness is divine

I can't find a way to grind your heart to a halt
It was probably just the wind
I don't ruin you like I did.

I would rather be a jealous man
Than an off-duty cop
I try to be a babe-in-arms,
Not a bull in a china shop
A sheep in wolfs clothes

I'm a hangman without a rope.
Who am I trying to kid?
I don't ruin you like I did.

When you live your life being scared to death
Then you might as well be wounded.
You spend your nights being short of breath
I keep these shadows moving

(If only you could see me now.)
If you could only see me now
I'll take what I can get even if it's a restraining orders.

Hold
Your
Fire

What do you take me for?
What do you take me for?
Did you think I could garner attention with tact?
What do you take me for?

What am I trying to prove?
What have I done to you?
Left at the altar and asked for a bed.
What did I expect you to do?

Give me an audience
Black loveless eyes
I have hundreds of costumes, but not one disguise.

Places everyone
Fangs out

I'd rather beg your forgiveness
Than solicit permission
I'd rather know that it broke your heart
Than doubt that it will

I would rather be a jealous man
Than an off-duty cop
I try to be a babe-in-arms.
Not a bull in a china shop

I will see
You in the dark
I will see
You in the dark

Castrated stranger with candy hearts.

At the bottom of the first drink I found my nerve. At the bottom of the next
one I met my girl. At the bottom of the third drink I found a fourth and at the
bottom of that one was a trojan horse that carried in demons who brought their
brides and they tempted darkness where I lost my mind. Well the fifth drink
found it and carried it home where my girl was waiting one foot out the door.
Another night spent gathering dust. Mug shot of a marble bust. Ruination leaves
the lantern lit so I know where the good lovin' is. I used to be a goddamn
saint. I said my prayers and handled snakes until the road introduced me to
sin. I only shook hands with drink but he had friends with him. I curse the day
we raised our glass up like a bridge to let the Devil pass because he ain't
ever left this town and only beaten and unborn are living with him now. I used
to be a holy man. "Once put an onion in a beggar's hand." But now I'd rather
not believe. How can a man I've never met be so cruel to me? At least I'm in
good company. I'll drink to that. Dash the cup. Fifteen years has been long
enough. Put the child in an unmarked grave and burn the black book, page by
page. Go alone, there is your road. For once, I'm awake and I will not serve
madness. I am not the company I keep. Dash the cup. Fifteen years has been long
enough put the child in an unmarked grave and burn the black book, page by
page.

Wherever I go, there too shall be grief (my love) doting on me, tenderly.
Vacant praise for her hollow man. Such poise. What loyalty, what elegance.
Inspired lust in a languid tongue (saved love) and found me where there once
was none. So I burned the bridge she'd have taken to leave. Each one. She's all
I have left. C'est la vie. The more it spreads the closer I come. (Better off
behind your back) where we consummate in the presence of none (dead weight
don't wait) for the violent and endless stream (a spineless yet supporting
cast) of charmless that are harming me. From the cradle to the grave it has
been a walk of shame. What did you think that your absence could bring, old
friend? My heart, it bursts with cavities. A slur couldn't rouse the sadness
I've seen look close. That beauty is life and she's with me. Flaunted
indifference is cheap cologne. Actor, you speak of me in formal tones. To the
gutless dogs that cried mutiny know this: marooned with grief, I'm richer than
kings. From the cradle to the grave has been a walk of shame. I am dead, what
is one less worm? Seconds off of a prisoners term? This is hell. You brought a
candle to burn? I am death. And you have marked my words.

Thanks Lord, but I don't need anymore poor advice, poor advice.

I caught in the cannon with a one way ticket.
Four riders in a town with one horse.
I wagered a sure thing,
Against what was behind the first door.
Stack the chips, ready to ride.
Out of sight, out of mind.
It's fool-proof and it won't do,
To make safe bets while I'm towing the line.

Thanks Lord, but I don't need anymore poor advice, poor advice.
Thanks Lord, but I don't need anymore poor advice, poor advice.

I had a lock on a dirty little secret,
A raging bull who was fixed to fall down.
I've been waiting at ringside my whole life but still swinging on.

I got debts piling high.
I got addictions and ex-wives
But I've stayed true, so I thank you
For bearing witness while I waste my fucking life.

I'm ready to pay the judge, to pay the judge, to pay the judge now
I need to tip the scales, some sort of bribery, I'm not waiting this out.
I need to pay the judge, to pay the judge, to pay the judge now
I need to grease a palm, some sort of certainty, I'm sick of waiting this out.

I should have learned a more noble craft,
Out of the library into the lab.
And will machine gunners please step forth?
Will machine gunners please step forth?
There's only room on the rescue boat,
For butchers and bakers and men with hope.
And will machine gunners please step forth?
Will machine gunners please step forth.

Thanks Lord, but I don't need anymore poor advice, poor advice.
Thanks Lord, but I don't need anymore poor advice, poor advice.

A proud hush had taken hold and you worshipped at its feet, but calm was
not long for this world. I took up arms and you begged I let it be, but reason
don't live here no more. Step aside, It's not worth your life. What is this
"peace" that you sneak off to at night? What sacred spot will I be buried in
when I have covered every inch of land in terribleness? I have declared a war
on the silence before the storm. Don't stop to think. Just end all good things
while you can. Ruin all the love that you have or that god damned thing is
bound to come back. In spades. Step aside, it's not worth your life. I am the
fear that drags you into the light. I've covered every inch of land in
terribleness by leading a war on the silence before the storm. Take the
stillness out back and put it on its knees. Stop your crying, who do you love
anyway? Who do you love? What does he have that I don't except you?

The stand in will suffice, I suppose. A tunnel painted on a brick wall.
When the crowd arrives in droves, they don't question the depth at all. I got a
weak heart, so I've heard. I wouldn't know because it hasn't said a word. All
these winters, not a sound. It probably never had a chance to thaw out. You
don't touch what you want to survive, so this distance is keeping me alive
until the ones that have loved me are dead. I will hold my breath. And pray
that my aim is true. The meat sits in my blind spot. The maze around it is the
meal I want. The meat sits in my blind spot. Hallelujah, got a trophy kill.
Maybe the flesh will have its day. Maybe the meaning will not get in the way.
God saves every third person, but he won't help us if we help ourselves I only
marvel at existence in the language existence permits. Most hearts make
terrible sounds, so I laugh. An army of images stalks the land in search of
ideas. I am struck only when I think to step back. So a stand will suffice, I
suppose. A tunnel paint on a brick wall. When the crowd arrives in droves, they
don't question the depth at all.

No broken hearted people, no crash, no flame, no sermon at a casket nor a
howl into the grave. Every bone was in position, every hair was in position.
Every hair was in its place. A light comes. Pulled off a dark country road. New
roman suicide note. All the way closed. So it goes. No organs to be salvaged,
no teeth to be compared, we asked for no police involvement because we knew you
weren't there. We threw a birthday party and at the table in your chair, a
lightness. Pulled off a dark country road. New roman suicide note. All the way
closed. So it goes. As long as your name is on my list or your story written in
the choruses then true death couldn't get you. But when its spoken for the last
time, the weight is lifted. A third eye. So I make a vow to forget you.

Deaf, blind granite block content to graze with familiar stock. A local
lard not an english black, we don't venture into the fog. Homeward bound and
gagged not twenty steps from the door. Dispensable as cooks at sea or
journalists sent to war. No one found me spellbinding, no one offered me a
drink. But by crippled hands at the potters wheel, I was given shape and
insects appeal. Sent to work the graveryard shift at heaven's JDC. A legend to
the peasants there, but lights had caught me unaware. I've wandered into your
graces, so how do I get out? It's been quiet for too long, but pompous phrases
and alarms can't help you now. And every pervert outside of every fence has had
his fill of your kids. He's clocking out. Such indecisive crusaders. A martyr
made into a scenic blur. A lookout into a left behind. What wounded pride. No
one finds me spellbinding. No ones buying me a drink. I've been to the lions.
Left high and dry by the 8th circle of hell. Where are the spoils? I want the
ticker tape parade. Damn these filthy rats.


Blood letting just to slake the lust of the little fangs writhing around
the trough. Oh how they run. While my love, back home at our infirmary, is
drying up. Her heart beat is on hold so if tomorrow finds her dead, I'll blame
the ones that "loved" me best; that worthless lying crowd of snakes and the
committee of pigs that suck on the breast of a pregnant pen and shit out
promises. I'm chastened by a spiteful and unrelenting "gift" like a horse at
the end of a whip, yet still holding up. But my love, she doesn't reap what I
sow. We cannot dine on bread alone. Give me the fuck what I am owed. Because
daddy needs a new pair of shoes and my girl is to be blue. I have given you
everything but it is never enough. My heart beat is on hold.

Still balancing the bar, stiff-necked. Withstanding change like a tragic
play or holy war between the sects. The carnival stands but the cities will
tend to move. Like planets around a star, or water circling the drain? Sould
less potboilers. Avant guardian angels on the wrong page of the map. Avant
guardian angel I am heartache, let me pass. Still holding up the wall. Still
life. A landmark placed for the photo op. He's got no teeth, he doesn't bite an
empire falls but the cockroaches stay to breed. Is it superior genes, or won't
death collect such awful things? Yes it's garbage, but does that mean that it's
art? Gourmet carnage, a pulse without a heart. If you leave it hanging long
enough, someone will be amazed and just because it's personal doesn't mean it's
not cliché. If it doesn't look like something now, steal it before it does.
Avant guardian angel on the wrong page of the map. Avant guardian angel I am
heartache, let me pass I will be there to help straighten out the frame that so
proudly displays my own death certificate.


You got me right where you wanted me.
So what do we do if I can’t hold this pose for too long.
So we shoot again, or does this whole operation shut down and we go back to the board.
I practiced all my lines, oh yea I’d feed every child in the world.
But it’s a one night stand baby.
We gotta keep on.
If you got it all then you got it right.
I’m gonna do what you say and get way out of line.
Nobody’s gonna stop me now.
It’s not how it looks unless you say nothing
We all agree this proposal’s been sentenced to death.
Are we baiting the right hook to get your attention.
The media needs another blackout.
We’ve been calling.
Flooding hotlines.
We’ve applied mascara to the radio but that’s just a quick fix and we need a little more.
Does it matter to you at all.
Are you listening or have you tuned out.
We’ve gotta get it together.
But first we drink and we take it all apart.
Everywhere we go we’re the local boys and we’re back in town.
Well that’s the way it is.

It breaks my heart.
We’ve applied mascara to the radio, but that’s just a quick fix and we need a little more.
Does it matter to you at all.
Are you listening or have you tuned out.
Get by.
Get gone.
Get high.
Get wronged.

Stutter step to the beat of a disparaged lover.
Dumb and pulsing we've become.
The bedroom door is an old black lung.
It's arrhythmic.
Uninviting and pliable.
With the noble irreverence of shrapnel she came for us.
Bore into our heads and found thoughtlessness.
Never minded the faithless courage of shame or the bravery of oblivion.
I'm on her mind, I'm never coming back.

If two timing is what it takes, then we both know one take is all we need
We're not equipped to stay, unloved,
But its all we've got and we're not at all alright.
Come on baby and give me the creeps.
Either you and I or both must go.
Either you and I or both must go.
I'm on her mind I'm never coming back.
If two timing is what it takes then we both know one take is all we need
We're not equipped to stay, unloved,
But its all we've got and we're not at all alright.
Theres no difference between being holy and alone.

That's why I'm eagerly fleeing the scene.
Lead footed.
Baby return the favor and leave somebody you love.
If they come back they're drunk and they're lonely.
We all get lonely.
God forbid we indulge when at sea.
Just the tempest, the temptress and me.
Naturally bored thriller.
Nobody knows the trouble I've been or the exacting improvement of sin.
I'm handling myself over.
I’m turning myself in.
War has no glory like a woman ignored.
So here's to the empires polluted with dead.
And the truckers wives who erected them.
I know the strippers real name.
Stop me if I'm wrong.

I was wrong, close one.
I am wrong.
I said it.
It was wrong, I mean it.
Did it stick.
Come down from there.
I know it’s hard to swallow but mam, your head is overturned.
Hey there girls, I'm a
There was venom in the heart of the dagger.
They found a worm in your pearls saying prayers.
All is finally infested, unless we blossomed in the cankerous air.
Then only hell can help us, I got off.
Just once, you were right.
I admit it.
We weren't soft, just better.
Do you flinch.
Keep that radio dry, I'm sorry you were all mine.
Let the boys find your body.
Let love gnaw the meat from your bones.
Admit the arrows, suffer the hot flash.
We come together now.
All together now.

Give the signal.
Advance the pill pushers.
Administer a change purse full of Thorazine.
Show this girl a little more bar courtesy and keep her senses clear of the scene.
We’ve found a gentleman caller who goes by the name she’s been weeping for.
Turn her over.
Easy in easy out.
We’ve nearly got this situation stabilized.
Just some winces to eradicate.
Take a deep breath.
Cut the blue wire.
Keep your fingers crossed and pray she’s been detached.
She stirs and I’m emasculated.
Doctor.
Doctor.
Give her the blues.

She got herself a varsity letter by loving you.
Breach and clear the abandoned back seat of the Cadillac.
We’ve been alerted by the local authorities that regret has been seen on the grounds
Teasing the dogs, making the rounds.
There’s a heart shaped bed in the honeymoon ward that circulates dust.
Twitches and vomits in fits like the damned.
Comforts none but the sloth.
Yet we pay by the hour for the bricklayers view.
Johnny, dream of your gun.
Godamnit it commander.
She’s a hopeless case.
Note the time she arrived.
I didn’t think we would lose another one to the sound.

There were too many fangs for us to tame.
Someone fetch her blue eyes.
From a restroom wall downtown.
She stirs.
We underestimated.
Doctor.
Doctor!
Give me the news.
She caught herself a case of the wilds by loving you.
She caught herself a bad case of the wilds and she flatlines.

Bedneck your gowns in bricks.
There’s leeches stealing across the stage.

Come hell or ocean water I won’t end up without.
Applaud the gall of the black cloud groping a drunken teenage vow.
As saline drips from her prom dress, damp hands are desiccated.
There’s a wolf at the window of the second floor who kidnaps your date with a new car.
We both want the same thing.
Bad poetry and assaults at the bar.
Just try and stop me.
We are the only one in the world.
Prepare the ballroom.
Quicksand in front of the coat check.
Waltz with the scarecrow in the spotlight through the rye.
I was born a wanted man.
But I’ll die a sailor’s wife.
God help me pick the lock to her room I have to make this right.
Scream the hounds to sleep for me.
I’m creeping around in your head like a vine.
Your spit is the meat of the rose harvested by the dull.
Let fly the doves, unhook their leather wings from the fog.
Put your foot and mouth together for the sweethearts of Vietnam.
In a photo taken of us,
At the reception held at the jail lover boy is breaking up just off to the right side of me.
I will stop at nothing.
I am the siren that sings you home.
Is that clear.
I will stop at nothing.
I am the tooth in your jewelry box.
Is that clear.
Let pry the crows.
Unhinge their crooked beaks from the clock
Put your foot and mouth together for the sweethearts of Vietnam.
Bolt the gate and head for the ivory tower.
Adoration is cutting the phone lines to your heart.
Love is here.
I am the snarling and starry-eyed.
We both want the same thing.
Better aim at the stranger in our yard.
Just try to stop me.
I am the blinding light of your life.
Prepare the body.
I’ve been better but thanks for asking.
Wait with the scarecrow for the spotlight in the rye.
I’ll eat you alive.
The calm will come again.

Baby you got me all wrong.
And maybe I’m not at all down and out.
I’m high and I’m in.
Don’t you know who I am.
I’m the jaded one with pop insensitivity.
When I finish struggling,
We can make our way to the dance floor and stand like strangers in an elevator
Stuck between stories.
I always find myself in the middle of your stories.
With the cameras as a witness I will suffer.
Everything I do is wrong.
But by god I do it right.

We don’t dance no no no.
We got class.
No we don’t have any fun at all.
It’s the new style and we know it.
We’re not stunning, we’re just stunned and we’re lying for a living.
Don’t you know who I am.
I’m the real thing with low-key sensibilities.
I don’t need what I’ve got half as much as everyone covets it.
If loving me is wrong, then god damn you do it right, it turns us on to turn you down.

We drew a crowd.
The crowd drew blood.
Fawning swindlers.
There’s a shark in the stream where the newborns are baptized.
Who let the flatterer, into the gallery, on our sweet sixteen.
Take him against the wall for the witness.

This is doom in a borrowed suit.
It's a pick up line at a funeral.
Cannibals along side the catwalk.
But its ok we've got old blood and our veins are rooted to the hornets nest again.
New love is tasteless.
We're wearing down.

This is the year of the party crasher.
What is charm.
Where are the heroics.

What is harm to the perfumed wrists of the stoics.
Designer Imposters find us twitching in the claws of the snake.
A fin is circling around in the floor.
It appears we've lost our way.
The tide is swelling and we've fallen asleep on the shore.
Get inside.
Someone’s yelling fire in the theater.
Oh dear God.
Everybody stay calm.
Tell your husband that his screaming just invited it in.
The horsemen are crashing through the gates.
Crashing through the gates.
We had better learn to play dead.
Our hands are reeking of rapture.
It's dripping from our chin.
The tragedy of infant hearts.
But it's ok
We've got old blood and our hair is woven to the same hotel again.
We're wearing down.
This is the year of the party crasher.
It's you and me for the first time, in history.
We're history.

Pull the car over you’re frightening the kids.
What did you promise us about grinning in the rear view without your fake teeth in.
Keep your glass eye glued on the end of the highway up ahead of us.
The collision is always licking its lips.
You weren’t supposed to open the door.
Just keep the plan from drifting of course.
We’ll attend to the terrified first class convinced there’s a hoof print on the bow.
All hail the wounded heart contingents
Who’ve given us something more than faultlessness to sing about.
Long live the prosthetic live wires.
The faulty mechanism of hope has disintegrated.

Your captain nailed his feet to someone else’s ship at the sight of me.
Do what your mother tells you and put down the sheriff’s horse.
The choir on the black box rejoiced splendidly, singing hallelujah the king is dead.
The king is dead.

This is a cause for celebration here in the belly of the swarm.
The situation demands that we raise our glasses in honour of the spokesman
We’ve fixated to the floor.
Give us your headline hymns and your saddest verse.

You’re not partnered with the half-hearted anymore.
Out legs are spread wide open,
Our weary heads are splitting at the seams
And we all know you’re proficient in the idioms of grief.
We are capable of the kind of love about which only the petrified can speak.
Concede him the microphone let him sing the triumph of the frauds to all his loyal sycofanatics.
We all cater to the fire, once the walls come rushing down for shame.
I can say it better than you felt it.
And I can be it bigger than you needed it.
I haven’t lived a day of my life apart from the one that everyone’s read about.
I’ll spark de-evolution.
I was specially bred for the cover page of your magazines.

I’ve been fatted up for the guillotines.
Sweet talker, you’re godamn right I’m a blessed lamb.
I can show you all how to have a good time.
I know why you came here, but neither of us will get what you want out of me.
This room has one too many laureates so I’m keeping my peace.
Every candidate ends his life with a cliché,
And the paths of glory lead to nowhere but the grave.

I’ve been spoiled rotten.
Every thought I’ve authorised had curdled.
Not everything is poetry but I can’t convince you of that,
I’ve been drawn and quartered.
I’ve been twice picked over.
And it’s sickening what you’ve come here today to celebrate.
Fuck yeah we’re gonna party tonight.
I am capable of the kind of love about which
Only the intoxicated and the California bound can weep.

Drifting on rescue, parade through the town square.
Waving to the families of victims of the flood.
Straddling the front door of a catholic orphanage.

I decorated it myself.
Thank you, you’re too much.
Honestly, it was nothing.

We should all just thank god I’m alive.
Don’t shout I get a little confused sometimes.
I can’t make out a word you’re saying.
I’ve got a 21 gun salute playing over and over and over in my head.
Can’t it wait.
I’m on call to be somewhere.
Somewhere I’m not.
In case the cleaning lady has found my head.

Forgive my delay lieutenant, I’m the man the whole country requires.
Take your gun out of my mouth.
You are ruining my appetite.
Get your bear trap off of my neck.
I’m already running late.
You’re distress is confounding the tightrope walker.
Just so we’re clear, you’re saying we’re all lost.
Maybe I’m wrong but weren’t we just dancing.
Oh, the way that we moved had every marauder curious.
Sniffing at the trash in our shoes.
Sharpening knives on the grindstone watch gears.
I don’t miss that much about anything you said.

After all, we’ve never met.
I’ll get it right, and stick my tongue down the throat of the moon.

The great American mischief had muted our hearts
And our rhythms are met with the inharmonious grunts of electric guitars.
It’s all but too much.

Still nobody out there believes the obscene are reprieved.
Everybody get fed up.
My baby better get high, I’ve got something I need to confess.
The dead mean talking are longing for so much more than simply the obvious.
Cut us off.
We’re suffering, hysterical, lighting flares from the foot of her bed.

I’ve been begging you for less mercy than this.
But the only thing you need to know is that you never wanted to know.
Take it off, take it back or take the cover because we’re nearing a nerve.
Death is wasted on the patient, so make haste and head for the wake.
Now the hornets inhabit the hearts we’ve abandoned.
We are the gone.
Cast aside clothes like funeral roses, and dance straight through the psalm.
I’m dead in the water.
Don’t come here for me.
I was once alive in the deserts eyes on the day it wed the sea.
I drew a chalk outline around your city.
Hushed the sobs in your halls.
But we both know it’s a killer, baby he will outrun them all.
There is so much shame in how little we’ve gained for so long.
Now the sky is falling.
And you’re just repeating every word I say.
You are not listening close enough.
It’s a catastrophe.
You have not been concentrating.
Pay attention there will be an exam.
Build an ark.
Come bring us back to the ruin.
Drifting out of our heads.
Taped off the sky above your city.
Dusted for prints on the chapel wall.
But we all know that it’s a killer, baby I will outrun them all.

we've drained full confession booths
polluted drinking wells with our repentances and then stood
grinning with our arms around shoulder of a rotting child.
hold that pose. provisional, arrogant little pigs who devour their siblings
shoot that dog if you can't afford to feed.
famine fathered a moth.
famine fathered a moth that begot our fathers.
keep your voices down I'm sneaking out.
hey! what's the big idea? keep your fucking hands off the insight
that rat has got it's mother's eyes. breeding ad nauseam, they are pouring themselves into the sea.
stop. thief.
leave your drunken accident at the prom. it'll grow to mend your broken heart.
don't sign the dotted line (every house is a little bit of Hollywood).
the world is too incredible to bring such ugliness into it
the artist is sneaking down the hall to impregnate the last of its kin.
indiscernible mute in a swarm of derivatives.
and I deny any part. I deny any part. a deadbeat godfather.
bite your tongue. who taught you those words?
blaspheme! when you are under my roof don't ever say "rock and roll".

oh lord, I am saved. judge says I'm fit to swing. 'bout time, I have prayed
my woman just might wear my ring.
oh you know I'm no good. you know I'm no good at court ordered goodbyes
but when I'm gone you'll see I'll be a better man yet. for the dispossessed get taken back into your arms
better keep me close to your heart. you'd better keep me close to your heart.
the divine had me cornered in a storm and let me walk out the front door at the scene of the crime.
hang 'em high. keep your vows brief
let him swing. make his swindle an art.
and if you still believe that men guilty of love can survive, then hang 'em high or not at all
oh you know it gets hard. it just gets so hard going limp in your arms.
I am clutching a smoking gun. there's no chance of me walking out of here alive.
this is all very literal. I can't bring myself around to write an excuse this time.
we're liberated by the hearts that imprison us. we're take hostage by the ones we break
throw the book.
you had me strung up by the tail and you put me back.
hang 'em high. keep your vows brief. let 'em swing.make his swindle an art.
and if you still believe that men guilty of love can survive, then hang 'em high or not at all.
where did you get the privilege to pardon me?

marched from a burning ship into a rained out parade. with a bottle and a bible the dregs are armed to the teeth.
we traded distinction and praise for the tedious claim that we were wed in the trenches while college boys pine for loveless exchange.
we carry the fragments from detonated eyes embedded under our bones. we've spilled blood for the sake of fitting skin to the frame but our moneys is no good here and our memorial has veered off the road.
the locals will bury my wandering eyes at the docks of the potters field where the rifles of ranking men are equipped with 21 silencers.
at 'em boys. give 'er the gun
at 'em boys. give 'er the gun
I'm the richest man in town.
I'm the richest man in town.
faith, stand down. five your wings to the boredom that resurrected my soul.
crash the car. if the motor won't turn over, glory be to god.
jumped from the disloyal waves back up to the bridge.
renounced the warmth of the turbulent grave.
I found blood on my lips from a covetous kiss and I hope that my home tips its glass to it.

turn the lights off, turn the lights off, your daddy better lock up his girls.
say a prayer boy, call on the cross because you ain't got no more when the music comes on.
board up the doors and windows and keep your crying under your breath.
I smell a drop of beer in a ten gallon tank and I'm moving in for the kill.
yea. in the wild kingdom you don't live until you're ready to die.
which one of you sons of bitches is gonna make me feel alive?
which one of you motherfuckers is gonna get inside me heart (attack)?
it's a full moon, denim is tight, and my flannel shirt is freaking out.
run for your life, cover your eyes, I don't want you to see me party this hard.
I've got a bone to pick with the morning sun and the first last call but I didn't put my hair in a pony tail for nothing, so if I'm going home alone I ain't going at all.
yea. I'm the wild kingdom you don't live until you're ready to die.
which one of you sons of bitches is gonna make me feel alive?
which one of you motherfuckers if gonna get inside my heart?
is gonna give me a heart attack?
look away it's too much to bear.
I've been bitten by the party animal.
save yourself.
save yourself.
tell my baby that I love her so.
don't cry. don't cry.
I gave the world one hell of a time and I don't regret a thing except for the time that I got caught givin' it.
I never thought it would take. I had thick blood and cynical skin.
to where are you supposed to escape, from the creature is lurking inside of you?

sound the bells and take to the streets in arms.
we're descending fast, a pox on your house of cards.
dry your eyes, your daughters have lost their faith and started feeding upon the bait that we wear on our sleeve.
promise us you won't tell the public the fury with which we despoil.
I've got a wife and kids and a hybrid car. I've got a good life and I can't risk losing.
if you can keep it a secret then me and the boys will bring pale hell to this town.
we're trouble bound and we summon the devil electric.
prey on the faint of heart.
we sing praises of the rebels who went by the book.
gravitate to teenagers artlessness' and sing it aloud.
the content is trivial. its pillow talk is plagiarized by the gadgets of lust.
just go to sleep, leave the gestures and customs to us.
cry fraud and let play the anthem of ear. cry fraud and let play the anthem of war
boys stand your ground. keep the delicate fingers but wrath in your white knuckled grip.
the film is loaded and it's aimed at the whites in their eyes.
you put out to get in. and we slipped right past the guards in the belly of a horse.
we sunk our fangs into the pulp of a desperate angst. we're powerless just until we're invited inside.
if you can keep it a secret then me and the boys will bring pale hell to this town.
we're trouble bound and we summon the devil electric.
prey on the faint of heart. we owe thanks to the revels who went by the book.
don't give up the ship. we'd rather sink than admit it. don't give up the ship.
we only have one night in town.


play with the bow at the bridge. tune your voices to minor chords. this is the lowest we've ever been until we bend for the offering.
we're giving a knee jerk response to the awe. we come strapped to the bed, on display from the duty of tour. they picked up the signals we tapped to the visitors
our sea legs were lost on the march from the graves to the cross. we brandish the plague of the middleman's heart.
sing the rats through the gate.
I was still in one piece when they tied me to the back of the car. but I met the road and I've slept with thousands of miles since the day I was born. our shoes are milled to the sole and our souls are skin and bones.
if I'm a stranger still just move the severed pieces around. so course is the world.
we're going back and forth and back and forth grinding our bodies into dust.
we'll never make it home alive.
play with the bow at the bridge.
all girls buy the enemy line. woe. such remarkable woe. hold sight of him.
point him out.I was still in one piece when they tied me to the back of the car. but I met with the road and I've slept with thousands of miles since the day I was born our shoes are milled to the sole and our souls are skin and bones.
if I'm a stranger still just move the severed pieces around. so course is the world.
we're going back and forth and back and forth grinding our bodies into dust.
war. come with us home.

you'd better shove another piece of what's left into your mouth while the gettin' is good. because you know the highs are running low, and every new is getting old.
lord, I've been down since you've been seeing another boy.
me and my girl are gonna smoke the cigarettes that we find in another man's tray. we're gonna pick all the meat from the big city bones because the hot is getting cold.
lord, I'm not proud. keep you chin up the water will boil, the comet will come for us all. so make amends with anything you've ever loved and open your arms to the swarm.
we have salted the earth. raid hell. raid hell.
you'd better drink up, get your sorrows in, because we're coming upon where the ending begins. the nickel city's new church says "no one allowed" since all the lights are going out. the end is near. I will be delivered. we've filled our bellies with so much repulsive flair I'll explode if I'm not forgiven.
make amends with anything you've ever loved and open your arms to the swarm.
we have salted the earth. raid hell. raid hell.
you'd better get it while the gettin' is good, corner boy. you know the highs are running low. you'd better shove another piece of what is left into your mouth. we need to learn to go without.
there is no plan for the dutiful. we dried the country making room for our grave. but my time is sure taking it's time running out.

vague men tied to a stake. gather round your little ones.
feast your eyes. steady your arm. behold!
we hit shore dragging miles of verse. poisoned food on the line, we're throwing it back.
thought the meat of this kill would feed starving artists for centuries.
skin him! gut him!
this is not what we bargained for. he is worthless unless he is whole.
make bait. food for thought. spit back every hound. spit back every hound.
all that we hunt for, we are.
plastic rabbits and white elephants.
an unclothed singularity is the fox that the dogs couldn't reach.
skin him! guy him!
the contaminated repast for the head of the bachelor band. make bait. food for thought.
you have no idea what you're up against. you have no idea.
I chewed off my very own head to get me out of this trap.
bring me the tongue. everything else is fat. salvage the tongue. discard the rest of him.
bring me the tongue. everything else is fat. salvage the tongue. everything else is fat.
bring me the tongue. throw back the rest of him.

I tied the devil to the tracks
(can you hear the train coming?).
I served him papers with a seal from the governor.
The spoiler throwing voices, the vapors that they built this city on.
But he don't write much for me anymore.

When we keep hell in our hearts,
We make no excuse for our genius.
So what's my excuse now that hell has abandoned me?
I enticed the devil out with a bottle.
But maybe it was he who lured me out instead.
When we slept in penitent beds,
We awoke in the loving arms of attrition.
So what's my excuse that hell isn't courting me?

Give me the strength to be widowed now that the honeymoon's over.
Grant me the privileges saved for the sailors.
Condemned with you all.
Goddamn you all.

I marched across the muddied stream,
Illuminated from beneath.
The lock was picked with the church's key we found on the belt of the veteran
To open bar tabs in the taverns assembled in levels by the damned and fanatic for me.

We never loved ourselves so well as when we lusted after another.
We hummed along to electric guitars and the standard "whoa oh oh oh's"
And we drank each other under the covers.

I eased the devil back with the throttle,
Because I'd rather live my life in regret than not take part in it.
If the devil don't mind, well it's alright with me.
So what do I do when the devil don't notice me?

Give me the strength to be widowed now that the honeymoon's over
Grant me the privileges saved for the sailors.
Condemned with you all.
Goddamn you all.

(And in my 27th year, I was dragged kicking and screaming into the
Light. I looked at god in the face and I said, I said god I said, "I
Thought I was in heaven the whole time")

I tied the devil to the tracks
(can you hear the train coming?)
And I tied the tracks in a lover's knot around the finger of a beautiful girl.
I'll keep hell if hell will have me.

we're making habits out of vanities and gospel for the stalls. the less you breathe the more you see of it all.
the lions share is courting the teen one hand holds them back while the other is holding me. we don't connect though we're both disconnected.
oh, oh yea we're so in love or else we're waving unloaded guns in the air. but it's the same thing ain't it?
I'm only here to give you someone to leave when you get bored but the first mistake so good it'll only ensure another.
oh, oh yea you look so good or you're just saving your flaws for the tight lipped lover. it's the same thing, ain't it?
we're lost.
profound.
and we are bound by the secrets we keep from each other.
pick up your heels or dig them in. it don't matter when the void is ravenous.
it's too late for us now anyway. it's too late for us now.
this confession is a lost cause- cause we got dead before we arrive.
we're making habits out of vanities and gospel for the stalls.
so grab your old lady and dance into the breach. yea lets dance one more time into the breach.
oh, oh yea we're so in love or else we're just waving unloaded guns into the air. but it's the same thing ain't it?
divine light speaks from a severed wire, so we hit the town like our parachutes failed.
we're lost.
profound.
and we are bound by the same dichotomy.

Don't try to resist, you're coming with us.
provisions are made, accommodations are met.
your words are recoded in the bleak genetics of the mob.
praise apocrypha-omitted offense,
to relieve us of guilt but not of our sin
we've sacrificed discourse at the feet of your clever turn-of-phrase.
now you owe it to us, we demand to be taken aback,
to be showed the revival of hope, for which your words are responsible.

Oh, it's the end of the line,
I'm cornered by a precedent; the sneering public eye
My job here is done.
My job here is done (you're fucking welcome).

retract the accolade, the candid acclaim
inspiration is cutting its loss
regurgitate headlines or a theory on modern art
You've been fooled again, the red herring's a joke.

I've tried so hard to tell you that I tapped the well dry,
but there's no word
stay wistful and young
the affected are banking on oblivion in the drone of embittered hope,
and we're sold by the way they wrote it.

Oh, it's the end of the line,
I'm cornered by a precedent; the sneering public eye
My job here is done.
My job here is done

it is better to destroy than to create what is meaningless,
so the picture will not be finished.

Most of what happens happens beyond words.
The lexicon of lip and fingertip
defies translation into common speech.
I recognize the musk of your dark hair.
It always thrills me, though I can't describe it.
My finger on your thigh does not touch skin—
it touches your skin warming to my touch.
You are a language I have learned by heart.

This intimate patois will vanish with us,
its only native speakers. Does it matter?
Our tribal chants, our dances round the fire
performed the sorcery we most required.
They bound us in a spell time could not break.
Let the young vaunt their ecstasy. We keep
our tribe of two in sovereign secrecy.
What must be lost was never lost on us.

My love, how time makes hardness shine.
They come in every color, pure or mixed
gray-green of basalt, blood-soaked jasper, quartz,
granite and feldspar, even bits of glass,
smoothed by the patient jeweller of the tides.

Volcano-born, earthquake-quarried,
shaven by glaciers, wind-carved, heat-cracked,
stratified, speckled, bright in the wet surf—
no two alike, all torn from the dry land
tossed up in millions on this empty shore.

How small death seems among the rocks. It drifts
light as a splintered bone the tide uncovers.
It glints among the shattered oyster shells,
gutted by gulls, bleached by salt and sun—
the broken crockery of living things.

Cormorants glide across the quiet bay.
A falcon watches from the ridge, indifferent
to the burdens I have carried here.
No point in walking farther, so I sit,
hollow as driftwood, dead as any stone.

my husband thinks we have too many chairs in our house. I know
we need more, my friend has enough chairs, many many more than
we have. I told my husband: chairs, picture frames — they are the same.


when my friend and her husband have talked about looking for
a different place to live, one with space for the families of their
six children, he says, "but I want this view." on the interior walls,
facing away from the sea, are paintings of this view — "well, it's not
exactly our view, but close" — taken somewhere on this small stretch
of land near the lighthouse, the painting of their house really of
the one next door, a corner of their house visible in the background
(receding in the perspective). in the Whistleresque painting, the house
next door is a train rushing forward through the night fog.




our daughter believing,
                             acting as though
(she believes) she can control the universe
                                                                          externals, personal

at dinner, after three days joking of this
(its urgency, extravagant tampering,
how she commands and navigates,
exhorts us: parents, boyfriend),
I say, too bluntly, "so —
have you thought of modifying
                      your
                   behavior?"
                                             crude, hurt her,
she cries, is embarrassed, she says,
thinking the others in the restaurant have heard,
"I know you don't mean to, but you're hard of hearing,
                                                                           you talk too loud."




reading garden books the last week, immersed in
gardens, in words, in visions of gardens

deer ate all the roses, the night Lily left the gate open


her husband wants this view, there is a place down the road, much larger,
it has the same view (nearly). he wants to move there, but the houses are entirely
different, the new one very formal, "a real house," my friend says. she is reluctant
to leave her perfect — the perfect she created — structure.
the chair, the frame, matter as much as the view they arrange.




ashamed, aware
I've cut too close
                                              "your behavior"

                               jokes are dismissable/admissible

this was criticism. I want to

apologize but do not

explanation       self-righteous (remember
an earlier fight,
when she lived with us, her shouting,
"why do you always have to be right?"
me shouting,
               "because I AM!")




or sinking, return


the authenticity (not authority) of others’ visions, seeing New York
thirdhand at the moment of being there firsthand with my friend.
my my interpretation of her memories — she’d lived there — inextricable
from my own immediately perceived visions.


descending into the subway on an August day, the steps down
to an aqua pool filled with Perrier. everyone breathing in the
airpockets the bubbles made, cool and floating under water.
they rose from the subway refreshed.


her dream became my strongest image of the city




later, we go to the movies, split up at the multiplex,
the men to a macho flick (we see the previews of their film/
glad we missed it).

she and I sit in the last row
— she doesn't want anyone behind her — spatial
                             boundary preemptive,
compelling
                                                                         throughout the movie
she tells latecomers the two seats beside her are taken. I talk to her about

                            imagining her aura


                I want to give her the house she wants.

                I love her so. I want her to know.

                like my mom




reading about newborn babies in the hospital, cribs ribboned
in blue and pink, "as if that's not enough," she says, "the cribs
are labeled: 'I'm a boy!' 'it's a girl!' "


looking out from oneself: I and thou. (bowing acknowledgment
in that "thou": blessing.) looking out for oneself: I and it.




imagining her aura — huge and wide —
so if someone sits near — it won't matter —
she'll still have personal space — "I know, I know" —
driving her Delta 88 — and she squeezes my hand —


her father out fishing on a boat in the afterlife
(according to the psychic) — something about wine —
your mother — tell her — "my mother doesn't drink" —
tell your mother to stop whining.




it is not one view. from the same chair it’s constantly changing,
coloring, waving. from different chairs, more so. gradations. water,
clearest of notices that we are (the world is) in constant motion.

putting forth first: we are? the world is?

world/we. moving out from where we are/moving in from out there.
the ferry crossing back and forth to the mainline, to “America.”
this place called simply, by islanders, “the island.” THE island.
there is no other frame or chair, no need for description, the world
is circumscribed.


I've drowned my conscience and cast another stone.
I took to preaching while dancing on the code.
I can't see where I've been and only god knows where I'll be.
But there must be a place for a wretch like me.

Oh, lord knows I'm tired,
But I, I, I won't rest my head until I'm home.
And if my hands find themselves another body, well,
You can't blame them for trying to keep warm.

Morals are simply a matter of time,
And where you lay your head's a question of pride.
But when it's said and done you'll find in the light,
That privilege and wit make me misfortune's child.

Can't tell collapse that it needs to slow down.
Can't tell death that it shouldn't come around.
And when they take my head and put it on a stake,
I know that guilt and disgrace keep the dead man awake.
Bartering your figure for a paralyzing love,
What have you done?
What have you done?

I tipped the scaffold and laughed until I fell.
Girl if you need me, grab another from the well.
I can't imagine what hell has in store,
But I know if I'm there I won't wander anymore.

Oh, lord knows I'm tired,
But I, I, I won't rest my head until I'm home.
And if my hands find themselves another body, well
You can't blame them for trying to keep warm.

Oh, lord knows I'm weak,
But I, I, I can't clear my head if I'm asleep.

Morals are simply a matter of tide,
And where you lay your head's a question of pride.
But when it's said and done you'll find in the light
That privilege and wit make me misfortune's child

Can't tell collapse that it needs to slow down.
Can't tell death that it shouldn't come around.
And when they take my head and put it on a stake,
I know that guilt and disgrace keep the dead man awake.

We've lived under this dark cloud forever.
Waited for the bad light to break.

Just let me tell that one again,
With a little more feeling.
We slept at the crossroads together,
Tried to make an honest mistake.
Just let me tell that one more time,
Without a smile on my face.

And now the road is empty.
As every promise is.
If life is pointless then point taken, say amen.
So light another candle and point my body out to sea,
Because your heart is no place for a wretch like me.

Another stranger passing.
A common dissonance.
If life is pointless then point taken, say amen.
So light another candle and point my body out to sea,
Because your side is no place for a wretch like me.

When they unearth these passages,
Will I appear to be proud?
Not if you're listening close enough.
Not if you're sounding it out.

God knows I've longed to feel something but now's not the time.
I'm caught up in the heartless disorder of a Friday night.
Focused on staying distracted until I lose sight of the tiresome and clinical patterns of my life.
I will cherish this love for the rest of my night.
One day I'll find myself facing the firing line.
Serves me right.
For the record I've written my crimes.
I will cherish this love for the rest of my night.

[Chorus:]
Lord have mercy on my soul.
I've had a good run but I can't run anymore.
Just put me down.
Lord have mercy on my soul.
I've had a good run but I can't run anymore.
Just put me down.
Can't sidestep the long arm for too long with this paper trail.
I've let them devour my heart for some material.
But I'm a drunkard, a coward, a crook. I ought to change my ways.
Face the music. Carry the can. Etcetera. Etcetera.

What's next?
Trust me, I'm still with you somewhere. I just wish it was here.
Someday I'm bound to feel guilty but now's not the time.
I'm sure I'll get what I'm due.
Everything will be fine.
Hell bent on finding the next fix in the fog.
You're in a cab on the way to your house. Change the locks.
I will cherish this love for the rest of the night.

I have lived every day of my life
Thinking only of what I should think
When I read back at everything
That I have written
On how I lived my life

And in the process of doing so
I have started the chance to feel alive.
Just to stay an observer of an impartial observer.

Here I go again. I'm chasing my tail around the sun.
Standing beneath a tortoise under an elephant under the world.
The gravity of the battle means nothing to those at peace.
I can't believe I thought my thoughts meant anything.

When we think we've reached the end, we're only back where we begin.
When we think we've reached the end, we're only back where we begin.
Superman. Superman. Superman.

We are starving to death on full stomachs.
Running miles, new hearts on old legs.
If I had known all the howls were false alarms,
Oh just imagine the ammo we'd save.

Here we go again.
I'll come to your party if it goes until 4 question marks at least.
3 or less and it's not worth my time at all.
On nights like those my absence trumps my company.

When we think we've reached the end, we're only back where we begin.
When we think we've reached the end, we're only back where we being.
Superman. Superman. Superman.

I truly believe I'll be remembered and that even this sentence will be studied.
Will you think I am wise because I'm aware of that?
Or am I just killing myself before they get me?

You've heard the voice of God, solely.
Everything is so clear to you.
Reload for the greater good.
Focus.
Throw us at the feet of the fools.
You don't know how lucky you are that your life is so characterless.
All the worlds a cage and we are animals pounding at the glass.
Housebroken, declawed. Unaware of the threat.
Bull hooks that keep us in line while cameras flash and we play while the trespassers plot to collect on their debts.
There were eyes everywhere that I went.
You'll be found.
Mark my words.
You will be found.
Stripped down and held to the light.
You will be found.
They will narrow their eyes, take aim and bring the world to its knees.
You'll be found.
Mark my words.
You will be found.
Just because you have figured it out.
Doesn't mean it won't happen to you.
Just because you have figured it out.
Doesn't mean it won't happen to you.
All the worlds a maze and they are scientists plotting every move.
Big brother will keep us in line with his snipers on the roof.
Though I'm cautious not to draw the attention of the fiends, I'm the happiest sadist around once surrendered to the drink.
There was fire everywhere that I stood.

There was fire everywhere that I stood.
Just because you're afraid of the dark doesn't mean that its frightened of you.
Just because you're afraid of the dark doesn't mean that its frightened of you.

You've heard the voice of God, solely.
Everything is so clear to you.
Slow down your racing heart.
Steady.
Quickly or it moves out of frame.
We are nothing more than mannequins.
Everyone is put of display.
This will not pass in time.
The moment will not pass.
Caught in the act for our lives.
The moment will not pass.
The dark doesn't flinch.
Take heed.
The moment will not pass.
Cover your tracks.
We're sitting ducks.
The moment will not pass.
We are nothing more than mannequins.

My cancer came knocking. It was dressed to the nines.
So I peeled back my skin and I let it come inside.
But it won't leave, though the guests have gone.
No, it pours a drink and requests another song.
Now it sleeps in between us.
Splits and doubles in size.
Apes my nuances of desertion, lust and arrogant pride.
And it drags me out of my head.
And it drags me out of my head.
The plague is now empowered.
My cancer waved torches.
Broke the lock on my door,
but I was powerless to refuse it anymore.
Is everyone comfortable? Is everyone having a good time?
My friends are all vampires. Come to drain and transform.
I keep the window cracked and the light on.

Kept the leftovers warm.
...maybe I make myself sick.
Make me give a damn and I will be with you everywhere.
I will open the sky.
I will follow you into hell
Kill everyone in our way.

Open your heart to the snake oil peddlers.
Open your heart to the snake oil peddlers.

"Make me give a damn and I will be with you everywhere.
I will open the sky.
I will follow you into hell
Kill everyone in our way."
Most romantic lines ever.

Snake oil peddlers are people who sell "medicine" but are fraudulent and/or ineffective.


Cleaned up the mess I'm in, now I am born again.
Naked, spotless motion without strings.
I've flushed the filth to sea, the limbs and sharp debris but if that water rises woe is me.
Hearts aren't beating they're counting down.
Breaths aren't stolen they're groomed and given out.
The closet is teeming with broken bones.
I'll be driven out and swallowed whole.
I walk a crooked mile with the devil on my back puppeteering, schemes with every step.
But I once could walk through walls and drift above it all, pursuing endless love to endless depths.
Hearts aren't beating they're counting down.
Breaths aren't stolen they're groomed and given out.
The closet is teeming with broken bones.
I'll be driven out and swallowed whole.
Object all you want but I am not done with you.
Lives will be lost.
Children will grieve.
Entire nations will crumble and blood will run deep, but we will be redeemed.
You and I will be weightless.
We'll stay unborn so death can't start the clock and love can seep through our pores.

Yea I know I look worse for the wear.
But I have everything at my fingertips.
I've been infantilized by a pat on the back and an endless go-ahead.
Ain't nothing gonna break my stride.
Ain't nothing gonna slow me down.
Oh no. When there's no one disapproving.

Yet its women not lack of ambition that keeps good men bedridden.
Jesus Christ I am forever making the same mistakes
Yet its women not lack of ambition that keeps good men bedridden.
Jesus Christ I am forever making the same mistakes.

I continue to stumble around as long as everyone cheers me on.
Am I the only one without the weapon to end the war?
Ain't nothing gonna break my stride.
Ain't nothing gonna slow me down.
Oh no. When there's no one disapproving.

Yet its women not lack of ambition that keeps good men bedridden.
Jesus Christ I am forever making the same mistakes
Yet its women not lack of ambition that keeps good men bedridden.
Jesus Christ I am forever making the same mistakes

Deaf men in the city of sirens.
Blind men in the presence of snakes.
But I'm adrift in a sea of temptation.
A newborn with inadequate skills.
Turn the party up, honestly be damned.
How fucking pathetic of me.
I can't go this way.
Not when I have your heart.
Oh what a childish life I have led.
God, what a wicked man I have been.
But ain't nothing gonna break my stride.
Ain't nothing gonna slow me down.
Oh no. When there's no on disapproving

Amidst the most barren scene how are we lost?
Lost?
Lost?
You've got to be fucking kidding me
Shut up
Just give me the wheel and I'll drive
You are not yet fit to speak on my behalf
We deserve to be moved by more than force alone
Instead I've been witness to loss
Upon loss
Upon loss
I'm assailed by the thoughtless who sing to their own
Caught in the middle
I'm pinned between the egos and the drones
Skill has been called to arms
Goddamn kids have grown up to let down
All around us are dissonant sounds
We're misplaced and we'll never be found
All these kids have grown up to let down
I'll be spinning in my grave for the rest of my life
Have I taught you children nothing all this time?
This labyrinth that we're puzzled by
Is nothing but a straight line
But sometimes those are even harder to navigate
We deserve to be moved by more than force alone
Instead I've been witness to loss
Upon loss
Upon loss
I'm assailed by the thoughtless who sing to their own
Caught in the middle
I'm pinned between the egos and the drones
Pride has been called to arms
Goddamn kids have grown up to let down
All around us are dissonant sounds
We're misplaced and we'll never be found
All these kids have grown up to let down
If this is the state of my art
Then I secede
If this is the state of my art
Then I secede
We're walking Spanish down a plank that stretches miles
You are not yet fit to speak on my behalf
What a shame we're forced
To suffer this senselessness and insanity

server the nerve
the skin
the scale
gather your bones from beyond the pale
come out of the wild and into the world
burn all the books
put out your eyes
lower your sword the end is nigh
sink through the pinewood and into the dirt
out of your body and into the sky
out of your body and into the sky

give in
voices will carry us
turn around.
find your way back to the start.

love is the way
love is the only way
love is the only way out

love is the way
love is the only way
love is the only way out

don't freeze up in the headlights
welcome it in
walk through the storm to the eye
the birth will be calm
the birth will be quiet
but the dark had such long arms
pulling me down
sliding back into my head
where all of it is thought without awareness
where there is no foresight only pertinence
i could scratch at the door
but I will never get in

so I rise above or I sink below
so I rise above or I sink below
either way I am false
at the center is all

I tripped up at the breakthrough
I was scared to die
so the gate locked
the light vanished
now where am I?
I was startled by the great height
I doubted my heart
now the wine turns to water
I am coming apart

Yeah!
I ain't afraid of the dark
I ain't worried about the savages loose in the night
but you show me the things I've done and girl you know
I get ch-ch-chills
all down my crooked spine

kill the lights

I've seen too much
if so below, then as above
lord knows I've seen enough

it's crystal clear and uglier than I thought
desperate and lonely juggernauts
illuminate the filth
with the glow of your righteous heart
shine a light upon the world
and I'll scurry back to the dark

lights on
rats out

the uppers lower me into the hive
the lights are low, us weeds come alive
downers pick me up into a ditch
I cannot scratch this never-ending itch

salvation is a hell of a thing

pull the dust up over your eyes

I don't believe I'll have a revelation with all these secrets of mine
and if I ever have a holy vision
it's going to be, two at a time
I got so much soul in me that I'm barely alive
I've been down and out for so long I can't be revived

Yeah!
I ain't afraid to be long lost
I ain't bothered by the silence, the cold, or the roads that stretch for miles
but you show me the man I've become and you girl you know
I want to tie up a rope
and crack my crooked spine

kill the lights

I've seen too much

I should have drown in the flood with the rest
I had the chance
the current was pitiless
and proof of man was wiped from the face off the earth, the song, the dance
i should have gone with it

alas, alas

I'm stranded alone in the wake
now I have lost all sight of the grave
when did I ever say that I want to be saved?
I can see for miles but it doesn't look the same
when no road has been paved,

go up

now how am I gonna get down?

I want a slow death wrought from the dregs
"I want to be sedated'
just like joey said.
I want the heaviest heart

I have eaten my weight in gold
I can see only what I'm shown up here
but in the coals with common men who yearn for ordinary things love cannot find us

so get out of my way
I got out of my own way
better a tramp, than a captive
better alone than lonely with all these "friends"

what in the fuck am I doing here?
why did the rapture not take me in?
it is my curse to carry on.

I should have died when I was young
I should still be burning lung
If i had known what I'd become

I should have drown in the flood with the rest
I had the chance,
but here I am.

we opened the box, and looked inside
two animals
one's dead one's alive
all we think we know is always wrong
the heavens fell in a thick awful shroud that covered the earth but there wasn't a sound
nobody saw it so nobody heard it
all these equations won't solve the uncertain

everything's dead until its alive
man will exist
and then he will die
just take the ride

see it now? see it now?
shift the absurd and the reasoned around
make it so, make is so
build holy places with towering stones.

open your eyes
it's all there inside
everything gone and forgotten survives
everything we know we think is wrong
all the lead becomes gold
all the squares get circled
all the graves, emptied and covered up.

we toil and we rot
and terrible things happened just like I thought
and the cycle carried on
until I thought nothing more and heartache was gone

love it as it is
whatever the fuck this is
or destroy and start again
what we are is in your head

hell broke loose
the stars unaligned
I looked for a kingdom that I'd never find
all I thought I knew was always wrong
I threw out the map and let go of the reigns
lead by a stranger into the strange
the answer is that there's no answer at all
the answer is that there's no answer at all

everything's dead until it's alive
man will exist and then he will die
just take the ride

pay no mind
to the stranger in
the 4 a.m
he's not the one we know

and he knows

I slept through the war
you waged with him
for a little bit
until he cracked your bones

and you had to let go

so I make believe
I've discovered peace
but I'll skin the man alive
and sell the meat

I'll wait in the dirt
where he left you blood
if he returns for it
I can make it right for good

oh how I wish he would

lost you in overflowing fog
that's been here awhile
so I plan to keep watch
as long as the wolves are out
they're always around
and more violet than hell

I have eyes of every color now
and they're vigilant
it doesn't matter who knocks
you don't let them in
there are terrible men
I'm one so I should know

heaven smiles on me now and then
but the devil always had hooks in

all I want is his head
and this horrible fucking world
will be wonderful again

there is so much beauty and love
and when I eat his beating heart
I can bring it back to us

there's nothing that I couldn't do
except cover you
when the slings and arrows came
and I've never been the same.

peel off the leather and dig out your heart, peel off the leather and dig out your heart,

right before your very eyes
I slipped off the husk
I mastered the sleight
there's a getaway car
that's been waiting my whole life
the engine has been running since the moment I arrived

a trap door in the gallows let the charlatan out
smoke and mirrors box him in
the rags and the bones were such a burden
that I though I'd collapse and only when I surrendered them
did I find I had what it takes to burn myself at the stake

did you smell a rat, did you smell a rat
did you smell a rat, did you smell a rat

I had faked everything but my death
across of the plane onto the shore
the strain on my back wasn't there anymore

wisdom teeth have replaced the fangs, wisdom teeth have replaced the fangs

I've been scalped, scalped, scalped
I've been knocked conscious and I still haven't come around
there was so much trouble on my mind, all the time
call on the ten thieves and tell them I'm ready

I looked up and the desert was everywhere
but insight comes through blackened eyes
I climbed a hill to dig a hole in the ground
where I could bury the faithlessness and the evidence that I was ever actually right
my skin was on too tight

I could not identify the body
us snakes evolve
it's what snakes do

i could not identify the body
shed the fur and leave the womb

there was gossip
there were pleas
there were rumors of meaning in meaningless things
widows readied their marital beds
litters of bastards gnawed at your breast
the filthy are first to be showered in love
the world's gone mad
we dress them in furs as they travel the earth
saints wear rags

you blessed our home
we took you in
but you had come to the place where the plague had been
It burrowed into your graces and airs
It took your queen
It hawked your wares
the stoic are first to be covered in shit and life goes on
but when it don't anymore I will see you in hell
where I am god
god damn it,
wait

they don't love you, like i do
but I don't know you, like them

they don't love you, like I do
they love you better, I know you best

every hostile deed is your death
It's not mine

I'm a great oasis
yeah I'm a mirage
I'm a beam of old light from a vanquished star and I'll only guide you into the dark
I'm a parasite with a tapeworm
yeah I got a bulletproof vest
knowing my bad luck I ain't ever gonna die so the good will never get any rest

come bail me out of the state I'm in
the drinks I've had are no match for the truth
the crowd down here put it's teeth in us
but the cure's more dangerous than the venom is
so we leave it in
and we do those things that make us forget that we're dying here
but we're dying here

so love your blood while you can
let it warm your freezing hands

I'm a dog-less master
yeah I'm a master-less dog
when the whip and the tether are put aside forever
I'm an ox that wanders into the swap
I'm a rattlesnake across a braided rope
I'm the demon on your side of the chalk
If I caught them girls who started them fires
they'll track me down in the fog

come bail me out of the state I'm in
the drinks I've had are no match for the truth
the crowd down here put it's teeth in us
but the cure's more dangerous than the venom is
so we leave it in
and we do those things that make us forget that we're dying here
but we're dying here

so love your blood while you can
let it warm your freezing hands

you put a hex me women
you're a thinner, you're a thinner
yeah and these are nuclear winters
atomic black winters
I kept the fire alive because
I'm a sinner, I'm a sinner
come here and let me boil your blood

I'm a train as long as the track
I am concurrently outbound and just now getting back
they strung me up by a rope as tall as the trees
though I land my two feet I still sway in the breeze

all of a sudden you're dead
the ground cracks and takes you in
you've no time to be born again
there was nothing where something had been
but every grave that blooms is anchored in miles of roots
in the seed is the tree
in the flesh is the feast

there were worms in the hearts that you hoard
they devour their way to the soul and the world is weakened from within
a hole opens up and you're dead

when I was pregnant I burned a witch alive
at a hundred and one years old
I gave birth to a cloud of smoke
we are part of a great machine
that inefficiently cycles grief
in the beginning it puts end and every cause is after effect

there were worms in the hearts that you hoard
they devour their way to the soul and the world is weakened from within
a hole opens up and you're dead

there's too much in poison in our glass to make a toast to our health
the cave that I built a kingdom on won't carry my weight
the past is clearer than it's ever been
our mistakes made ourselves
blood rushes out of our phantom limbs
we take on the water we're floating in
but I'll never be clean

you were alone when you came in
you'll be alone when you leave again
and in the middle there's nothing
that can keep you around when it's time to go home
because everybody I lean on
(since I don't trust myself)
leans on someone else
watch the colonies collapse like dominoes

I could beg and I could plead
but all I hear is the echo of my own voice begging me

the fossils of the teen age are well preserved in the arctic wasteland


I crawled on hands and knees just to be there with you
and you moved on without me

scrap the crown, clear the slate
cut off you roots, you're on your own
scrap the crown, clear the slate
cut off you roots, you're on your own

we all need something

I'm a gypsy queen
without a swarm
and the burning bridges keep me warm

I'm a new wave
In a dried up stream
I'm just trying to find my way out to the sea

you were alone when you came here
you'll be alone when you leave again
and in the middle there's nothing
that can keep you around when it's time to go home
because everybody I lean on
(since I don't trust myself)
leans on someone else
watch the colonies collapse like dominoes

I could beg and I could plead
but all I hear is the echo of my own voice begging me

the fossils of the teen age are well preserved in the arctic waste

crush your allies

from my skin
I emit flashing lights

In my eyes all you find
are flashing lights

from my mouth, every sound a warning bell
fill the room, kill the mood and overwhelm

break up the crowd
suck the life out

break up the crowd
suck the life out

paralyzed until the flesh crawls right off my bones
I can't push words past the knot in my throat
water stands where once water could flow
this is not my familiar broken home

hide you drugs
fix your shirt
turn it down

I botched the lines
tongue is tied
get me out

scatterbrained
It can't be fixed
nothing fits

out of film
out of room
full eclipse

break up the crowd
suck the life out

break up the crowd
suck the life out

the edges are made out of stone
I built a maze I can not get out of
the edges are made out of stone
this labyrinth I have trapped myself in

throw me a rope, throw me a rope, throw me a rope

I'm trapped in a wreck under myself
pinned to an old soul
while everyone I love
stays forever young

the roads are blocked
the petals closed
they're on to me
the song is too loud
I cannot dance
they're on to me
the air is weighs a ton

all I want is for everyone to go to hell
It's the last place I was seen before I lost myself
all I want is for everyone to come to hell
there we can be free and learn to love ourselves.

Under layers of solid rock,
Far removed from the shifting tides,
And having weathered all acts of God:
The artifacts of the glory vibe.

The holy "unrecognizable"
Lighting up real cigarettes,
Cursed by ex lives;
Drinking only to free themselves
From the hands of cruel women in another man’s home,
From the graves of good friends on the side of the road.
No posture, no proof of the one night stand,
Just shadows and stories and the blood on their hands.

The time-worn Juvenihilists
Struck fear until the bones collapsed.
The afterlife is eternal after hours.
We saw the light and we all turned back.

Haunted by the teen spirits dragging wallet chains;
Painting a telephone number on the wall of the cave;
Spill your guts to the stranger with the free cocaine;
Everybody’s petrified, so nobody gets to change.

Entombed
In youth

Embalmed
With awe

We all discover the fire

The prehistoric post-modernist's
Lost art of eye contact.
These skeletons are a fucking riot,
Dig them up and bring them back.

We had trained the kind of demons that would rip you apart;
We only knew it was love once it broke our hearts;
“Our best friends float in the bottom of a glass;”
Don’t hold anybody close that would hold you back.

Draw breath. but are you alive?

Once
God
Gives
You
No-
thing
To fear,
Fear then.

It reads
Your lips.

It reads
Your lips.

We festered in the dark
Flies on the wall had us surrounded.
The almighty eye is inescapable.
All the unknown is manifest.
The gallows are vast and they are vacant.
What was unsaid is understood.
The Lord, he is fierce, but he is patient.
What was undone will stay undone.
Our prayers are delayed and they are makeshift.

The aura is
Around me

There's a spell coming on.
The devils got me, i done no wrong.
I am star-crossed.
Star-crossed.

I have buried all the trash,
But the earth shakes
And spits it back.

It is still here.
It is all here.

Mask it.
Fake it.
But the nature of our selves
Is evident.

The camera was hidden, but it was on us.
Every last word is second-guessed.
Go to the tape and you’ll never get back.
What was unseen is obvious.
Carved into fire, forever reaching.
The door has swung wide, it can’t be shut.
Those that keep watch remember everything.

Judged
By
All.

Stripped
Of
Flesh.

with ragged beats & the beats
are too beat to live so the graves push out with
hands that cannot touch the makers of light & the
sun flames down through the roofs & the roots that slide
to one side & the whistlin' fires of the cops & the cops
in the shops do what they gotta do & your body's
on the fence & your ID's in the air & the shots
get fired & the gas in the face & the tanks
on your blood & the innocence all around & the
spillin' & the grillin' & the grinnin' & the game of Race
no one wanted & the same every day so U fire &
eat the smoke thru your long bones & the short mace
& the day? This last sweet Swisher day that turns to love
& no one knows how it came or what it is or what it says
or what it was or what for or from what gate
is it open is it locked can U pull it back to your life
filled with bitter juice & demon angel eyes even though
you pray & pray mama says you gotta sing she says
you got wings but from what skies from where could
they rise what are the things the no-things called love
how can its power be fixed or grasped so the beats
keep on blowin' keep on flyin' & the moon tracks your bed
where you are alone or maybe dead & the truth
carves you carves you & calls you back still alive
cry cry the candles by the last four trees still soaked
in Michael Brown red and Officer Liu red and
Officer Ramos red and Eric Garner whose
last words were not words they were just breath
askin' for breath they were just burnin’ like me like
we are all still burnin' can you hear me
can you can you feel me swaggin' tall & driving low &
talkin' fine & hollerin' from my corner crime & fryin’
                                                                            against the wall

almost livin' almost dyin'
almost livin' almost dyin'

In inaccurate skin,
among hologram trees,
fresh from the tundra of dreams,
I hear public television say
that Jesus was trilingual.
Billie Holiday sings
the loss of plotliness,
the loss of onomatopoeiabreath.
Doris asks if I’ll touch
her titanium humerus—I do.
I go to Sheboygan to stand in
Emery Blagdon's "The Healing
Machine," which was brought in
pieces from the Nebraska Plains.
Its coffee can klieg lights' grace
and copper wire sculptures
leave burns all over me.
Death is like Russia:
beautiful, cold, expansive,
expensive. Ephesus says:
even marble turns to chalk.
Aldebaran is nearing
the end of its life.
Jupiter and the moon are
the closest they'll be until 2026.
It's 25-below wind chill. Winds
push iced piers into houses.
My wounds smell like strawberries.
Jim who once saw a UFO
and was too tired to tell anyone,
who rode a tiger, and
slept with his cornet's mouthpiece
stenciled on his lips, was a lifelong
Indiana water garden gang member,
Jim who delivered a baby
from my body, Jim, impresario
of poems, parking tickets, and
sky-blue hydrangeas, Jim who
"wore a crown of snow,"
Jim's ashes change the garden.
Who can sleep with banded
Jupiter so close to the moon?

There’s trouble on the mountain
And the valley’s full of smoke
There’s crying on the mountain
And again the same heart broke.

The lights are on past midnite
The curtains closed all day
There’s trouble on the mountain
The valley people say.


When I am a toddler, a child, a tween, a teen, and a young adult, I am called an ancestral soul, a ti gran moun, a little old person.

Adults study me and decide that I am wise beyond my years, mature for my age, emotionally ripe. I am told it is unusual to meet a five-ten-fifteen-year-old girl who does not slouch or mumble or speak in monosyllables.

When I do the things that come naturally to me—when I hold my spine up erect, when I wait my turn to speak, when I speak having listened, carefully, when I enunciate, when I look grown-ups in the eye—I am told I must have “been here before.”

"How do you know?" one college professor asks me after she has seen a psychologically violent play I have written at age nineteen. "How do you already know?”

In high school, I charm my teachers. They encourage me to write speeches about feminism that I recite for International Women's Day at City Hall or deliver as part of conference panels at local universities. “If you were older," they tell me, "we would probably be friends.” One of them even flirts with me.

Among my peers I exist somewhere between amicably mysterious and irrevocably dorky. The popular kids greet me in the hallways, but they never invite me to their beer-drenched parties. I will never play Spin the Bottle. I will never play Seven Minutes in Heaven. My mother tells me she is protecting me from boys, but the truth is, after I do my homework, she wants me to type up another family friend’s résumé or resignation letter. At home, I am a bridge, a cultural interpreter, a spokesperson, a trusted ally, an American who is Haitian too, but also definitely American.

The children of immigrants don't get to be children. We lose our innocence watching our parents' backs bend, break. I am an old soul because when I am young, I watch my parents' spirits get slaughtered.

In Haiti, they were middle class. Hopeful teachers. Home owners. They were black like their live-in servants. They donated clothes to the poor. They gave up everything they knew to inherit American dreams. And here, they join factory lines, wipe shit from mean old white men's behinds, scrub five-star hotel toilets for dimes above minimum wage. Here, they shuck and jive and step and fetch and play chauffeur to people who aren't as smart as they are, people who do not speak as many languages as they do. In the 1980s, they are barred from giving blood because newscasters and politicians say that AIDS comes from where they come from: Haiti, the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, a black magic island that spawns boat people and chaos, a place of illiterate zombies, orphan beggars and brazen political corruption.

When I am a child, my childhood is a luxury my family cannot afford. Their dignity is not spared, so my innocence is not spared. They are humihated and traumatized daily, so I become a nurse to their trauma. I am told too much, so I know too much, so I am wise beyond my years.

When I am six, my mother tells me she found out she was pregnant with me at age nineteen, she “tried to kill the baby." She says "the baby," as if it isn’t me she’s talking about; as if I am not the expensive, scandalous daughter who forced my way into her world despite the abortion-inducing herbal teas she drank and her frantic leaps off of small buildings.

When I am sixteen, my father calls me on the phone to, inevitably, weep. He says, "Living in this country, I have learned not to hope for things. Only you are my hope. Only you."

So—yes, I grow up fast.
