THE DEPUTY LEFT CHIGURH standing in the corner of the office with his hands cuffed
behind him while he sat in the swivelchair and took off his hat and put his feet up and called
Lamar on the mobile.
Just walked in the door. Sheriff he had some sort of thing on him like one of them oxygen
tanks for emphysema or whatever. Then he had a hose that run down the inside of his sleeve
and went to one of them stunguns like they use at the slaughterhouse. Yessir. Well that's what
it looks like. You can see it when you get in. Yessir. I got it covered. Yessir.
When he stood up out of the chair he swung the keys off his belt and opened the locked desk
drawer to get the keys to the jail. He was slightly bent over when Chigurh squatted and
scooted his manacled hands beneath him to the back of his knees. In the same motion he sat
and rocked backward and passed the chain under his feet and then stood instantly and
effortlessly. If it looked like a thing he'd practiced many times it was. He dropped his cuffed
hands over the deputy's head and leaped into the air and slammed both knees against the back
of the deputy's neck and hauled back on the chain.
They went to the floor. The deputy was trying to get his hands inside the chain but he could
not. Chigurh lay there pulling back on the bracelets with his knees between his arms and his
face averted. The deputy was flailing wildly and he'd begun to walk sideways over the floor in
a circle, kicking over the wastebasket, kicking the chair across the room. He kicked shut the
door and he wrapped the throwrug in a wad about them. He was gurgling and bleeding from
the mouth. He was strangling on his own blood. Chigurh only hauled the harder. The
nickelplated cuffs bit to the bone. The deputy's right carotid artery burst and a jet of blood
shot across the room and hit the wall and ran down it. The deputy's legs slowed and then
stopped. He lay jerking. Then he stopped moving altogether. Chigurh lay breathing quietly,
holding him. When he got up he took the keys from the deputy's belt and released himself and
put the deputy's revolver in the waistband of his trousers and went into the bathroom.
He ran cold water over his wrists until they stopped bleeding and he tore strips from a
handtowel with his teeth and wrapped his wrists and went back into the office. He sat on the
desk and fastened the toweling with tape from a dispenser, studying the dead man gaping up
from the floor. When he was done he got the deputy's wallet out of his pocket and took the
money and put it in the pocket of his shirt and dropped the wallet to the floor. Then he picked
up his air-tank and the stungun and walked out the door and got into the deputy's car and
started the engine and backed around and pulled out and headed up the road.
On the interstate he picked out a late model Ford sedan with a single driver and turned on the
lights and hit the siren briefly. The car pulled onto the shoulder. Chigurh pulled in behind him
and shut off the engine and slung the tank across his shoulder and stepped out. The man was
watching him in the rearview mirror as he walked up.
What's the problem, officer? he said.
Sir would you mind stepping out of the vehicle?
The man opened the door and stepped out. What's this about? he said.
Would you step away from the vehicle please.
The man stepped away from the vehicle. Chigurh could see the doubt come into his eyes at
this bloodstained figure before him but it came too late. He placed his hand on the man's head
like a faith healer. The pneumatic hiss and click of the plunger sounded like a door closing.
The man slid soundlessly to the ground, a round hole in his forehead from which the blood
bubbled and ran down into his eyes carrying with it his slowly uncoupling world visible to
see. Chigurh wiped his hand with his handkerchief. I just didnt want you to get blood on the
car, he said.
MOSS SAT WITH THE HEELS of his boots dug into the volcanic gravel of the ridge and
glassed the desert below him with a pair of twelve power german binoculars. His hat pushed
back on his head. Elbows propped on his knees. The rifle strapped over his shoulder with a
harness-leather sling was a heavybarreled .270 on a '98 Mauser action with a laminated stock
of maple and walnut. It carried a Unertl telescopic sight of the same power as the binoculars.
The antelope were a little under a mile away. The sun was up less than an hour and the
shadow of the ridge and the datilla and the rocks fell far out across the floodplain below him.
Somewhere out there was the shadow of Moss himself. He lowered the binoculars and sat
studying the land. Far to the south the raw mountains of Mexico. The breaks of the river. To
the west the baked terracotta terrain of the running borderlands. He spat dryly and wiped his
mouth on the shoulder of his cotton workshirt.
The rifle would shoot half minute of angle groups. Five inch groups at one thousand yards.
The spot he'd picked to shoot from lay just below a long talus of lava scree and it would put
him well within that distance. Except that it would take the better part of an hour to get there
and the antelope were grazing away from him. The best he could say about any of it was that
there was no wind.
When he got to the foot of the talus he raised himself slowly and looked for the antelope.
They'd not moved far from where he last saw them but the shot was still a good seven
hundred yards. He studied the animals through the binoculars. In the compressed air motes
and heat distortion. A low haze of shimmering dust and pollen. There was no other cover and
there wasnt going to be any other shot.
He wallowed down in the scree and pulled off one boot and laid it over the rocks and lowered
the forearm of the rifle down into the leather and pushed off the safety with his thumb and
sighted through the scope.
They stood with their heads up, all of them, looking at him.
Damn, he whispered. The sun was behind him so they couldnt very well have seen light
reflect off the glass of the scope. They had just flat seen him.
The rifle had a Canjar trigger set to nine ounces and he pulled the rifle and the boot toward
him with great care and sighted again and jacked the crosshairs slightly up the back of the
animal standing most broadly to him. He knew the exact drop of the bullet in hundred yard
increments. It was the distance that was uncertain. He laid his finger in the curve of the
trigger. The boar's tooth he wore on a gold chain spooled onto the rocks inside his elbow.
Even with the heavy barrel and the muzzlebrake the rifle bucked up off the rest. When he
pulled the animals back into the scope he could see them all standing as before. It took the
150 grain bullet the better part of a second to get there but it took the sound twice that. They
were standing looking at the plume of dust where the bullet had hit. Then they bolted.
Running almost immediately at top speed out upon the barrial with the long whaang of the
rifleshot rolling after them and caroming off the rocks and yawing back across the open
country in the early morning solitude.
He stood and watched them go. He raised the glasses. One of the animals had dropped back
and was packing one leg and he thought that the round had probably skipped off the pan and
caught him in the left hindquarters. He leaned and spat. Damn, he said.
He watched them out of sight beyond the rocky headlands to the south. The pale orange dust
that hung in the windless morning light grew faint and then it too was gone. The barrial stood
silent and empty in the sun. As if nothing had occurred there at all. He sat and pulled on his
boot and picked up the rifle and ejected the spent casing and put it in his shirtpocket and
closed the bolt. Then he slung the rifle over his shoulder and set out.
It took him some forty minutes to cross the barrial. From there he made his way up a long
volcanic slope and followed the crest of the ridge southeast to an overlook above the country
into which the animals had vanished. He glassed the terrain slowly. Crossing that ground was
a large tailless dog, black in color. He watched it. It had a huge head and cropped ears and it
was limping badly. It paused and stood. It looked behind it. Then it went on. He lowered the
glasses and stood watching it go.
He hiked on along the ridge with his thumb hooked in the shoulderstrap of the rifle, his hat
pushed back on his head. The back of his shirt was already wet with sweat. The rocks there
were etched with pictographs perhaps a thousand years old. The men who drew them hunters
like himself. Of them there was no other trace.
At the end of the ridge was a rockslide, a rough trail leading down. Candelilla and scrub
catclaw. He sat in the rocks and steadied his elbows on his knees and scanned the country
with the binoculars. A mile away on the floodplain sat three vehicles.
He lowered the binoculars and looked over the country at large. Then he raised them again.
There looked to be men lying on the ground. He jacked his boots into the rocks and adjusted
the focus. The vehicles were four wheel drive trucks or Broncos with big all-terrain tires and
winches and racks of rooflights. The men appeared to be dead. He lowered the glasses. Then
he raised them again. Then he lowered them and just sat there. Nothing moved. He sat there
for a long time.
When he approached the trucks he had the rifle unslung and cradled at his waist with the
safety off. He stopped. He studied the country and then he studied the trucks. They were all
shot up. Some of the tracks of holes that ran across the sheetmetal were spaced and linear and
he knew they'd been put there with automatic weapons. Most of the glass was shot out and the
tires flat. He stood there. Listening.
In the first vehicle there was a man slumped dead over the wheel. Beyond were two more
bodies lying in the gaunt yellow grass. Dried blood black on the ground. He stopped and
listened. Nothing. The drone of flies. He walked around the end of the truck. There was a
large dead dog there of the kind he'd seen crossing the floodplain. The dog was gutshot.
Beyond that was a third body lying face down. He looked through the window at the man in
the truck. He was shot through the head. Blood everywhere. He walked on to the second
vehicle but it was empty. He walked out to where the third body lay. There was a shotgun in
the grass. The shotgun had a short barrel and it was fitted with a pistol stock and a twenty
round drum magazine. He nudged the man's boot with his toe and studied the low surrounding
hills.
The third vehicle was a Bronco with a lifted suspension and dark smoked windows. He
reached up and opened the driver side door. There was a man sitting in the seat looking at
him.
Moss stumbled back, leveling the rifle. The man's face was bloody. He moved his lips dryly.
Agua, cuate, he said. Agua, por dios.
He had a shortbarreled H&K machinepistol with a black nylon shoulderstrap lying in his lap
and Moss reached and got it and stepped back. Agua, the man said. Por dios.
I aint got no water.
Agua.
Moss left the door open and slung the H&K over his shoulder and stepped away. The man
followed him with his eyes. Moss walked around the front of the truck and opened the door
on the other side. He lifted the latch and folded the seat forward. The cargo space in the rear
was covered with a metallic silver tarp. He pulled it back. A load of bricksized parcels each
wrapped in plastic. He kept one eye on the man and got out his knife and cut a slit in one of
the parcels. A loose brown powder dribbled out. He wet his forefinger and dipped it in the
powder and smelled it. Then he wiped his finger on his jeans and pulled the tarp back over the
parcels and stepped back and looked over the country again. Nothing. He walked away from
the truck and stood and glassed the low hills. The lava ridge. The flat country to the south. He
got out his handkerchief and walked back and wiped clean everything he'd touched. The
doorhandle and the seatlatch and the tarp and the plastic package. He crossed around to the
other side of the truck and wiped everything down there too. He tried to think what else he
might have touched. He went back to the first truck and opened the door with his kerchief and
looked in. He opened the glovebox and closed it again. He studied the dead man at the wheel.
He left the door open and walked around to the driver side. The door was full of bulletholes.
The windshield. Small caliber. Six millimeter. Maybe number four buckshot. The pattern of
them. He opened the door and pushed the windowbutton but the ignition was not on. He shut
the door and stood there, studying the low hills.
He squatted and unslung the rifle from off his shoulder and laid it in the grass and took the
H&K and pushed back the follower with the heel of his hand. There was a live round in the
chamber but the magazine held only two more rounds. He sniffed at the muzzle of the piece.
He ejected the clip and slung the rifle over one shoulder and the machinepistol over the other
and walked back to the Bronco and held the clip up for the man to see. Otra, he said. Otra.
The man nodded. En mi bolsa.
You speak english?
He didnt answer. He was trying to gesture with his chin. Moss could see two clips sticking out
of the canvas pocket of the jacket he was wearing. He reached into the cab and got them and
stepped back. Smell of blood and fecal matter. He put one of the full clips into the
machinepistol and the other two in his pocket. Agua, cuate, the man said.
Moss scanned the surrounding country. I told you, he said. I aint got no water.
La puerta, the man said.
Moss looked at him.
La puerta. Hay lobos.
There aint no lobos.
Si, si. Lobos. Leones.
Moss shut the door with his elbow.
He went back to the first truck and stood looking at the open door on the passenger side.
There were no bulletholes in the door but there was blood on the seat. The key was still in the
ignition and he reached in and turned it and then pushed the windowbutton. The glass
ratcheted slowly up out of the channel. There were two bulletholes in it and a fine spray of
dried blood on the inside of the glass. He stood there thinking about that. He looked at the
ground. Stains of blood in the clay. Blood in the grass. He looked out down the track south
across the caldera back the way the truck had come. There had to be a last man standing. And
it wasnt the cuate in the Bronco begging for water.
He walked out on the floodplain and cut a wide circle to see where the track of the tires in the
thin grass would show in the sun. He cut for sign a hundred feet to the south. He picked up the
man's trail and followed it until he came to blood in the grass. Then more blood.
You aint goin far, he said. You may think you are. But you aint.
He quit the track altogether and walked out to the highest ground visible holding the H&K
under his arm with the safety off. He glassed the country to the south. Nothing. He stood
fingering the boar's tusk at the front of his shirt. About now, he said, you're shaded up
somewheres watchin your backtrack. And the chances of me seein you fore you see me are
about as close to nothin as you can get without fallin in.
He squatted and steadied his elbows on his knees and with the binoculars swept the rocks at
the head of the valley. He sat and crossed his legs and went over the terrain more slowly and
then lowered the glasses and just sat. Do not, he said, get your dumb ass shot out here. Do not
do that.
He turned and looked at the sun. It was about eleven oclock. We dont even know that all of
this went down last night. It could of been two nights ago. It might even could of been three.
Or it could of been last night.
A light wind had come up. He pushed back his hat and wiped his forehead with his bandanna
and put the bandanna back in the hip pocket of his jeans. He looked across the caldera toward
the low range of rock on the eastern perimeter.
Nothin wounded goes uphill, he said. It just dont happen.
It was a good hard climb to the top of the ridge and it was close to noon by the time he got
there. Far off to the north he could see the shape of a tractor-trailer moving across the
shimmering landscape. Ten miles. Maybe fifteen. Highway 90. He sat and swept the new
country with the glasses. Then he stopped.
At the foot of a rockslide on the edge of the bajada was a small piece of something blue. He
watched it for a long time through the binoculars. Nothing moved. He studied the country
about. Then he watched it some more. It was the better part of an hour before he rose and
started down.
The dead man was lying against a rock with a nickelplated government .45 automatic lying
cocked in the grass between his legs. He'd been sitting up and had slid over sideways. His
eyes were open. He looked like he was studying something small in the grass. There was
blood on the ground and blood on the rock behind him. The blood was still a dark red but then
it was still shaded from the sun. Moss picked up the pistol and pressed the grip safety with his
thumb and lowered the hammer. He squatted and tried to wipe the blood off the grips on the
leg of the man's trousers but the blood was too well congealed. He stood and stuck the gun in
his belt at the small of his back and pushed back his hat and blotted the sweat from his
forehead with his shirtsleeve. He turned and stood studying the countryside. There was a
heavy leather document case standing upright alongside the dead man's knee and Moss
absolutely knew what was in the case and he was scared in a way that he didnt even
understand.
When he finally picked it up he just walked out a little ways and sat down in the grass and slid
the rifle off his shoulder and laid it aside. He sat with his legs spaced and the H&K in his lap
and the case standing between his knees. Then he reached and unbuckled the two straps and
unsnapped the brass latch and lifted the flap and folded it back.
It was level full of hundred dollar banknotes. They were in packets fastened with banktape
stamped each with the denomination $10,000. He didnt know what it added up to but he had a
pretty good idea. He sat there looking at it and then he closed the flap and sat with his head
down. His whole life was sitting there in front of him. Day after day from dawn till dark until
he was dead. All of it cooked down into forty pounds of paper in a satchel.
He raised his head and looked out across the bajada. A light wind from the north. Cool.
Sunny. One oclock in the afternoon. He looked at the man lying dead in the grass. His good
crocodile boots that were filled with blood and turning black. The end of his life. Here in this
place. The distant mountains to the south. The wind in the grass. The quiet. He latched the
case and fastened the straps and buckled them and rose and shouldered the rifle and then
picked up the case and the machinepistol and took his bearings by his shadow and set out.
He thought he knew how to get to his truck and he also thought about wandering through the
desert in the dark. There were Mojave rattlesnakes in that country and if he got bit out here at
night he would in all likelihood be joining the other members of the party and the document
case and its contents would then pass on to some other owner. Weighed against these
considerations was the problem of crossing open ground in broad daylight on foot with a fully
automatic weapon slung across one shoulder and carrying a satchel containing several million
dollars. Beyond all this was the dead certainty that someone was going to come looking for
the money. Maybe several someones.
He thought about going back and getting the shotgun with the drum magazine. He was a
strong believer in the shotgun. He even thought about leaving the machinepistol behind. It
was a penitentiary offense to own one.
He didnt leave anything behind and he didnt go back to the trucks. He set out across country,
cutting through the gaps in the volcanic ridges and crossing the flat or rolling country
between. Until late in the day he reached the ranch road he'd come down that morning in the
dark so long ago. Then in about a mile he came to the truck.
He opened the door and stood the rifle in the floor. He went around and opened the driver
door and pushed the lever and slid the seat forward and set the case and the machine-pistol
behind it. He laid the .45 and the binoculars in the seat and climbed in and pushed the seat
back as far as it would go and put the key in the ignition. Then he took off his hat and leaned
back and just rested his head against the cold glass behind him and closed his eyes.
When he got to the highway he slowed and rattled over the bars of the cattleguard and then
pulled out onto the blacktop and turned on the headlights. He drove west toward Sanderson
and he kept to the speed limit every mile of the way. He stopped at the gas station on the east
end of town for cigarettes and a long drink of water and then drove on to the Desert Aire and
pulled up in front of the trailer and shut off the motor. The lights were on inside. You live to
be a hundred, he said, and there wont be another day like this one. As soon as he said it he
was sorry.
He got his flashlight from the glovebox and climbed out and took the machinepistol and the
case from behind the seat and crawled up under the trailer. He lay there in the dirt looking up
at the underside of it. Cheap plastic pipe and plywood. Bits of insulation. He wedged the
H&K up into a corner and pulled the insulation down over it and lay there thinking. Then he
crawled back out with the case and dusted himself off and climbed the steps and went in.
She was sprawled across the sofa watching TV and drinking a Coke. She didnt even look up.
Three oclock, she said.
I can come back later.
She looked at him over the back of the sofa and looked at the television again. What have you
got in that satchel?
It's full of money.
Yeah. That'll be the day.
He went into the kitchen and got a beer out of the refrigerator.
Can I have the keys? she said.
Where you goin.
Get some cigarettes.
Cigarettes.
Yes, Llewelyn. Cigarettes. I been settin here all day.
What about cyanide? How are we fixed for that?
Just let me have the keys. I'll set out in the damn yard and smoke.
He took a sip of the beer and went on back into the bedroom and dropped to one knee and
shoved the case under the bed. Then he came back. I got you some cigarettes, he said. Let me
get em.
He left the beer on the counter and went out and got the two packs of cigarettes and the
binoculars and the pistol and slung the .270 over his shoulder and shut the truck door and
came back in. He handed her the cigarettes and went on back to the bedroom.
Where'd you get that pistol? she called.
At the gettin place.
Did you buy that thing?
No. I found it.
She sat up on the sofa. Llewelyn?
He came back in. What? he said. Quit hollerin.
What did you give for that thing?
You dont need to know everthing.
How much.
I told you. I found it.
No you never done no such a thing.
He sat on the sofa and put his legs up on the coffeetable and sipped the beer. It dont belong to
me, he said. I didnt buy no pistol.
You better not of.
She opened one of the packs of cigarettes and took one out and lit it with a lighter. Where
have you been all day?
Went to get you some cigarettes.
I dont even want to know. I dont even want to know what all you been up to.
He sipped the beer and nodded. That'll work, he said.
I think it's better just to not even know even.
You keep runnin that mouth and I'm goin to take you back there and screw you.
Big talk.
Just keep it up.
That's what she said.
Just let me finish this beer. We'll see what she said and what she didnt say.
When he woke it was 1:06 by the digital clock on the bedside table. He lay there looking at
the ceiling, the raw glare of the vaporlamp outside bathing the bedroom in a cold and bluish
light. Like a winter moon. Or some other kind of moon. Something stellar and alien in its light
that he'd come to feel comfortable with. Anything but sleep in the dark.
He swung his feet from under the covers and sat up. He looked at her naked back. Her hair on
the pillow. He reached and pulled the blanket up over her shoulder and got up and went into
the kitchen.
He took the jar of water from the refrigerator and unscrewed the cap and stood there drinking
in the light of the open refrigerator door. Then he just stood there holding the jar with the
water beading cold on the glass, looking out the window and down the highway toward the
lights. He stood there for a long time.
When he went back to the bedroom he got his shorts off the floor and put them on and went
into the bathroom and shut the door. Then he went through into the second bedroom and
pulled the case from under the bed and opened it.
He sat in the floor with the case between his legs and delved down into the bills and dredged
them up. The packets were twenty deep. He shoved them back down into the case and jostled
the case on the floor to level the money. Times twelve. He could do the math in his head. Two
point four million. All used bills. He sat looking at it. You have to take this seriously, he said.
You cant treat it like luck.
He closed the bag and redid the fasteners and shoved it under the bed and rose and stood
looking out the window at the stars over the rocky escarpment to the north of the town. Dead
quiet. Not even a dog. But it wasnt the money that he woke up about. Are you dead out there?
he said. Hell no, you aint dead.
She woke while he was getting dressed and turned in the bed to watch him.
Llewelyn?
Yeah.
What are you doin?
Gettin dressed.
Where are you goin?
Out.
Where are you goin, baby?
Somethin I forgot to do. I'll be back.
What are you goin to do?
He opened the drawer and took the .45 out and ejected the clip and checked it and put it back
and put the pistol in his belt. He turned and looked at her.
I'm fixin to go do somethin dumbern hell but I'm goin anyways. If I dont come back tell
Mother I love her.
Your mother's dead Llewelyn.
Well I'll tell her myself then.
She sat up in the bed. You're scarin the hell out of me, Llewelyn. Are you in some kind of
trouble?
No. Go to sleep.
Go to sleep?
I'll be back in a bit.
Damn you, Llewelyn.
He stepped back into the doorway and looked at her. What if I was to not come back? Is them
your last words?
She followed him down the hallway to the kitchen pulling on her robe. He took an empty
gallon jug from under the sink and stood filling it at the tap.
Do you know what time it is? she said.
Yeah. I know what time it is.
Baby I dont want you to go. Where are you goin? I dont want you to go.
Well darlin we're eye to eye on that cause I dont want to go neither. I'll be back. Dont wait up
on me.
He pulled in at the filling station under the lights and shut off the motor and got the survey
map from the glovebox and unfolded it across the seat and sat there studying it. He finally
marked where he thought the trucks should be and then he traced a route cross country back to
Harkle's cattle-gate. He had a good set of all-terrain tires on the truck and two spares in the
bed but this was some hard country. He sat looking at the line he'd drawn. Then he bent and
studied the terrain and drew another one. Then he just sat there looking at the map. When he
started the engine and pulled out onto the highway it was two-fifteen in the morning, the road
deserted, the truck radio in this outland country dead even of static from one end of the band
to the other.
He parked at the gate and got out and opened it and drove through and got out and closed it
again and stood listening to the silence. Then he got back in the truck and drove south on the
ranch road.
He kept the truck in two wheel drive and drove in second gear. The light of the unrisen moon
before him spread out along the dark placard hills like scrimlights in a theatre. Turning below
where he'd parked that morning onto what may have been an old wagonroad that bore
eastward across Harkle's land. When the moon did rise it sat swollen and pale and ill formed
among the hills to light up all the land about and he turned off the headlights of the truck.
A half hour on he parked and walked out along the crest of a rise and stood looking over the
country to the east and to the south. The moon up. A blue world. Visible shadows of clouds
crossing the floodplain. Hurrying on the slopes. He sat in the scabrock with his boots crossed
before him. No coyotes. Nothing. For a Mexican dopedealer. Yeah. Well. Everbody is
somethin.
When he got back to the truck he left the trace and steered by the moon. He crossed under a
volcanic headland at the upper end of the valley and turned south again. He had a good
memory for country. He was crossing terrain he'd scouted from the ridge earlier that day and
he stopped again and got out to listen. When he came back to the truck he pried the plastic
cover from the domelight and took the bulb out and put it in the ashtray. He sat with the
flashlight and studied the map again. When next he stopped he just shut off the engine and sat
with the window down. He sat there for a long time.
He parked the truck a half mile above the upper end of the caldera and got the plastic jug of
water out of the floor and put the flashlight in his hip pocket. Then he took the .45 off the seat
and shut the door quietly with his thumb on the latchbutton and turned and set off toward the
trucks.
They were as he'd left them, hunkered down on their shot-out tires. He approached with the
.45 cocked in his hand. Dead quiet. Could be because of the moon. His own shadow was more
company than he would have liked. Ugly feeling out here. A trespasser. Among the dead.
Dont get weird on me, he said. You aint one of em. Not yet.
The door of the Bronco was open. When he saw that he dropped to one knee. He set the
waterjug on the ground. You dumb-ass, he said. Here you are. Too dumb to live.
He turned slowly, skylighting the country. The only thing he could hear was his heart. He
made his way to the truck and crouched by the open door. The man had fallen sideways over
the console. Still trussed in the shoulderbelt. Fresh blood everywhere. Moss took the
flashlight from his pocket and shrouded the lens in his fist and turned it on. He'd been shot
through the head. No lobos. No leones. He shone the hooded light into the cargo space behind
the seats. Everything gone. He switched off the light and stood. He walked out slowly to
where the other bodies lay. The shotgun was gone. The moon was already a quarter ways up.
All but day bright. He felt like something in a jar.
He was half way back up the caldera to his truck when something made him stop. He
crouched, holding the cocked pistol across his knee. He could see the truck in the moonlight
at the top of the rise. He looked off to one side of it to see it the better. There was someone
standing beside it. Then they were gone. There is no description of a fool, he said, that you
fail to satisfy. Now you're goin to die.
He shoved the .45 into the back of his belt and set off at a trot for the lava ridge. In the
distance he heard a truck start. Lights came on at the top of the rise. He began to run.
By the time he got to the rocks the truck was halfway down the caldera, the lights bobbing
over the bad ground. He looked for something to hide behind. No time. He lay face down with
his head between his forearms in the grass and waited. Either they'd seen him or they hadnt.
He waited. The truck went by. When it was gone he rose and began to clamber up the slope.
Halfway up he stopped and stood sucking air and trying to listen. The lights were somewhere
below him. He couldnt see them. He climbed on. After a while he could see the dark shapes of
the vehicles down there. Then the truck came back up the caldera with the lights off.
He lay flattened against the rocks. A spotlight went skittering over the lava and back again.
The truck slowed. He could hear the engine idling. The slow lope of the cam. Big block
engine. The spotlight swept over the rocks again. It's all right, he said. You need to be put out
of your misery. Be the best thing for everbody.
The engine revved slightly and idled down again. Deep guttural tone to the exhaust. Cam and
headers and God knows what else. After a while it moved on in the dark.
When he got to the crest of the ridge he crouched and took the .45 out of his belt and
uncocked it and put it back again and looked out to the north and to the east. No sign of the
truck.
How would you like to be out there in your old pickup tryin to outrun that thing? he said.
Then he realized that he would never see his truck again. Well, he said. There's lots of things
you aint goin to see again.
The spotlight came on again at the head of the caldera and moved across the ridge. Moss lay
on his stomach watching. It came back again.
If you knew there was somebody out here afoot that had two million dollars of your money, at
what point would you quit lookin for em?
That's right. There aint no such a point.
He lay listening. He couldnt hear the truck. After a while he rose and made his way down the
far side of the ridge. Studying the country. The floodplain out there broad and quiet in the
moonlight. No way to cross it and nowhere else to go. Well Bubba, what are your plans now?
It's four oclock in the mornin. Do you know where your darlin boy is at?
I'll tell you what. Why dont you just get in your truck and go on out there and take the son of
a bitch a drink of water?
The moon was high and small. He kept his eye on the plain below as he climbed along the
slope. How motivated are you? he said.
Pretty damn motivated.
You better be.
He could hear the truck. It came around the foreland head of the ridge with the lights off and
started down the edge of the floodplain in the moonlight. He flattened himself in the rocks. In
addition to the other bad news his thoughts ran to scorpions and rattlesnakes. The spotlight
kept rowing back and forth across the face of the ridge. Methodically. Bright shuttle, dark
loom. He didnt move.
The truck crossed to the other side and came back. Tooling along in second gear, stopping, the
motor loping. He pushed himself forward to where he could see it better. Blood kept running
into his eye from a cut in his forehead. He didnt even know where he'd gotten it. He wiped his
eye with the heel of his hand and wiped his hand on his jeans. He took out his kerchief and
pressed it to his head.
You could head south to the river.
Yeah. You could.
Less open ground.
Less aint none.
He turned, still holding the handkerchief to his forehead. No cloud cover in sight.
You need to be somewhere come daylight.
Home in bed would be good.
He studied the blue floodplain out there in the silence. A vast and breathless amphitheatre.
Waiting. He'd had this feeling before. In another country. He never thought he'd have it again.
He waited a long time. The truck didnt come back. He made his way south along the ridge. He
stood and listened. Not a coyote, nothing.
By the time he'd descended onto the river plain the sky to the east carried the first faint wash
of light. It was the darkest this night was going to get. The plain ran to the breaks of the river
and he listened one last time and then set out at a trot.
It was a long trek and he was still some two hundred yards from the river when he heard the
truck. A raw gray light was breaking over the hills. When he looked back he could see the
dust against the new skyline. Still the better part of a mile away. In the dawn quiet the sound
of it no more sinister than a boat on a lake. Then he heard it downshift. He pulled the .45 from
his belt so that he wouldnt lose it and set out at a dead run.
When he looked back again it had closed a good part of the distance. He was still a hundred
yards from the river and he didnt know what he'd find when he got there. A sheer rock gorge.
The first long panes of light were standing through a gap in the mountains to the east and
fanning over the country before him. The truck was ablaze with lights, roof rack and bumper
spots. The engine kept racing away into a howl where the wheels left the ground.
They wont shoot you, he said. They cant afford to do that.
The long crack of a rifle went caroming out over the pan. What he'd heard whisper overhead
he realized was the round passing and vanishing toward the river. He looked back and there
was a man standing up out of the sunroof, one hand on top of the cab, the other cradling a rifle
upright.
Where he reached the river it made a broad sweep out of a canyon and carried down past great
stands of carrizo cane. Downriver it washed up against a rock bluff and then bore away to the
south. Darkness deep in the canyon. The water dark. He dropped into the cut and fell and
rolled and rose and began to make his way down a long sandy ridge toward the river. He
hadnt gone twenty feet before he realized that he had no time to do that. He glanced back once
at the rim and then squatted and shoved himself off down the side of the slope, holding the .45
before him in both hands.
He rolled and slid a good ways, his eyes almost shut against the dust and sand he was plowing
up, the pistol clutched to his chest. Then all that stopped and he was simply falling. He
opened his eyes. The fresh world of morning above him, turning slowly.
He slammed into a gravel bank and gave out a groan. Then he was rolling through some sort
of rough grass. He came to a stop and lay there on his stomach gasping for air.
The pistol was gone. He crawled back through the flattened grass until he found it and he
picked it up and turned to scan the rim of the river breaks above him, whacking the
pistolbarrel across his forearm to shake out the dirt. His mouth was full of sand. His eyes. He
saw two men appear against the sky and he cocked the pistol and fired at them and they went
away again.
He knew he didnt have time to crawl to the river and he just rose and made a run for it,
splashing across the braided gravel flats and down a long sandbar until he came to the main
channel. He got out his keys and his billfold and buttoned them into his shirtpocket. The cold
wind blowing off the water smelled of iron. He could taste it. He threw away the flashlight
and lowered the hammer on the .45 and shoved it into the crotch of his jeans. Then he
shucked off his boots and pulled them inside his belt upside down at either side and tightened
the belt as far as he could pull it and turned and dove into the river.
The cold took his breath. He turned and looked back toward the rim, blowing and
backpedaling through the slate-blue water. Nothing there. He turned and swam.
The current carried him down into the bend of the river and hard up against the rocks. He
pushed himself off. The bluff above him rose dark and deeply cupped and the water in the
shadows was black and choppy. When he finally spilled out into the tailwater and looked back
he could see the truck parked at the top of the bluff but he couldnt see anyone. He checked to
see that he still had his boots and the gun and then turned and began to stroke for the far
shore.
By the time he dragged himself shivering out of the river he was the better part of a mile from
where he'd gone in. His socks were gone and he set out at a jog barefoot toward the standing
cane. Round cups in the shelving rock where the ancients had ground their meal. When he
looked back again the truck was gone. Two men were trotting along the high bluff silhouetted
against the sky. He was almost to the cane when it rattled all about him and there was a heavy
whump and then the echo of it from across the river.
He was hit in the upper arm by a buckshot and it stung like a hornet. He put his hand over it
and dove into the cane, the lead ball half buried in the back of his arm. His left leg kept
wanting to give out beneath him and he was having trouble breathing.
Deep in the brake he dropped to his knees and knelt there sucking air. He undid his belt and
let the boots drop into the sand and reached down and got the .45 and laid it to one side and
felt the back of his arm. The buckshot was gone. He unbuttoned his shirt and took it off and
pulled his arm around to see the wound. It was just the shape of the buckshot, bleeding
slightly, pieces of shirtfiber packed into it. The whole back of his arm was already becoming
an ugly purple bruise. He wrung the water out of his shirt and put it on again and buttoned it
and pulled on the boots and stood and buckled his belt. He picked up the pistol and took the
clip out of it and ejected the round from the chamber and then shook the gun and blew
through the barrel and reassembled it. He didnt know if it would fire or not but he thought it
probably would.
When he came out of the cane on the far side he stopped to look back but the cane was thirty
feet high and he couldnt see anything. Downriver was a broad bench of land and a stand of
cottonwoods. By the time he got there his feet were already beginning to blister from walking
barefoot in the wet boots. His arm was swollen and throbbing but the bleeding seemed to have
stopped and he walked out into the sun on a gravel bar and sat there and pulled off the boots
and looked at the raw red sores on his heels. As soon as he sat down his leg began to hurt
again.
He unsnapped the small leather holster at his belt and got out his knife and then stood up and
took off his shirt again. He cut off the sleeves at the elbow and sat and wrapped his feet in
them and pulled on the boots. He put the knife back in the holster and fastened it and picked
up the pistol and stood and listened. A redwing blackbird. Nothing.
As he turned to go he heard the truck very faintly on the far side of the river. He looked for it
but he couldnt see it. He thought that by now probably the two men had crossed the river and
were somewhere behind him.
He went on through the trees. The trunks silted up from the high water and the roots tangled
among the rocks. He took off his boots again to try to cross the gravel without leaving any
tracks and he climbed a long and rocky rincon toward the south rim of the river canyon
carrying the boots and the wrappings and the pistol and keeping an eye on the terrain below.
The sun was in the canyon and the rocks he'd crossed would dry in minutes. At a bench near
the rim he stopped and lay on his belly with his boots in the grass beside him. It was only
another ten minutes to the top but he didnt think he had ten minutes. On the far side of the
river a hawk set forth from the cliffs whistling thinly. He waited. After a while a man came
out of the cane upriver and paused and stood. He was carrying a machinegun. A second man
emerged below him. They glanced at one another and then came on.
They passed below him and he watched them out of sight down the river. He wasnt really
even thinking about them. He was thinking about his truck. When the courthouse opened at
nine oclock Monday morning someone was going to be calling in the vehicle number and
getting his name and address. This was some twenty-four hours away. By then they would
know who he was and they would never stop looking for him. Never, as in never.
He had a brother in California he was supposed to tell what? Arthur there's some old boys on
their way down there to see you who propose to lower your balls between the jaws of a sixinch
machinist's vise and commence crankin on the handle a quarter turn at a time whether
you know where I'm at or not. You might want to think about movin to China.
He sat up and wrapped his feet and pulled the boots on and stood and started up the last
stretch of canyon to the rim. Where he crested out the country lay dead flat, stretching away to
the south and to the east. Red dirt and creosote. Mountains in the far and middle distance.
Nothing out there. Heatshimmer. He stuck the pistol in his belt and looked down at the river
one more time and then set out east. Langtry Texas was thirty miles as the crow flies. Maybe
less. Ten hours. Twelve. His feet were already hurting. His leg hurt. His chest. His arm. The
river dropped away behind him. He hadnt even taken a drink.
II
I DONT KNOW if law enforcement work is more dangerous now than what it used to be or
not. I know when I first took office you'd have a fistfight somewheres and you'd go to break it
up and they'd offer to fight you. And sometimes you had to accommodate em. They wouldnt
have it no other way. And you'd better not lose, neither. You dont see that so much no more,
but maybe you see worse. I had a man pull a gun on me one time and it happened that I
grabbed it just as he went to fire and the plunger on the hammer went right through the fleshy
part of my thumb. You can see the mark of it there. But that man had ever intention of killin
me. A few years ago and it wasnt that many neither I was goin out one of these little two lane
blacktop roads of a night and I come up on a pickup truck that they was two old boys settin in
the bed of it. They kindly blinked in the lights and I backed off some but the truck had
Coahuila plates on it and I thought, well, I need to stop these old boys and take a look. So I
hit the lights and whenever I done that I seen the slider window in the back of the cab open
and here come somebody passin a shotgun out the window to the old boy settin in the bed of
the truck. I'll tell you right now I hit them brakes with both feet. It skidded the unit sideways to
where the lights was goin out into the brush but the last thing I seen in the bed of the truck
was the old boy puttin that shotgun to his shoulder. I hit the seat and I just had hit it when
here come the windshield all over me in them little bitty pieces they break up into. I still had
one foot on the brake and I could feel the cruiser slidin down into the bar ditch and I thought
it was goin to roll but it didnt. It filled the car just full of dirt. The old boy he opened up on me
twice more and shot all the glass out of one side of the cruiser and by then I'd come to a stop
and I laid there in the seat, had my pistol out, and I heard that pickup leave out and I raised
up and fired several shots at the taillights but they was long gone.
Point bein you dont know what all you're stoppin when you do stop somebody. You take out
on the highway. You walk up to a car and you dont know what you're liable to find. I set there
in that cruiser for a long time. The motor had died but the lights was still on. Cab full of glass
and dirt. I got out and kindly shook myself off and got back in and just set there. Just kindly
collectin my thoughts. Windshield wipers hangin in on the dashboard. I turned off the lights
and I just set there. You take somebody that will actually throw down on a law enforcement
officer and open fire, you have got some very serious people. I never saw that truck again.
Nobody else did neither. Or not them plates noways. Maybe I should of took out after it. Or
tried to. I dont know. I drove back to Sanderson and pulled in at the cafe and I'll tell you they
come from all over to see that cruiser. It was shot just full of holes. Looked like the Bonnie
and Clyde car. I didnt have a mark on me. Not even from all that glass. I was criticized for
that too. Parkin there like I done. They said I was showin out. Well, maybe I was. But I
needed that cup of coffee too, I'll tell you.
I read the papers ever mornin. Mostly I suppose just to try and figure out what might be
headed this way. Not that I've done all that good a job at headin it off. It keeps gettin harder.
Here a while back they was two boys run into one another and one of em was from California
and one from Florida. And they met somewheres or other in between. And then they set out
together travelin around the country killin people. I forget how many they did kill. Now what
are the chances of a thing like that!' Them two had never laid eyes on one another. There cant
be that many of em. I dont think. Well, we dont know. Here the other day they was a woman
put her baby in a trash compactor. Who would think of such a thing? My wife wont read the
papers no more. She's probably right. She generally is.
BELL CLIMBED THE REAR steps of the courthouse and went down the hall to his office.
He swiveled his chair around and sat and looked at the telephone. Go ahead, he said. I'm here.
The phone rang. He reached and picked it up. Sheriff Bell, he said.
He listened. He nodded.
Mrs Downie I believe he'll come down directly. Why dont you call me back here in a little bit.
Yes mam.
He took off his hat and put it on the desk and sat with his eyes closed, pinching the bridge of
his nose. Yes mam, he said. Yes mam.
Mrs Downie I havent seen that many dead cats in trees. I think he'll come down directly if
you'll just leave him be. You call me back in a little bit, you hear?
He hung the phone up and sat looking at it. It's money, he said. You have enough money you
dont have to talk to people about cats in trees.
Well. Maybe you do.
The radio squawked. He picked up the receiver and pushed the button and put his feet up on
the desk. Bell, he said.
He sat listening. He lowered his feet to the floor and sat up.
Get the keys and look in the turtle. That's all right. I'm right here.
He drummed his fingers on the desk.
All right. Keep your lights on. I'll be there in fifty minutes. And Torbert? Shut the trunk.
He and Wendell pulled onto the paved shoulder in front of the unit and parked and got out.
Torbert got out and was standing by the door of his car. The sheriff nodded. He walked along
the edge of the roadway studying the tire tracks. You seen this, I reckon, he said.
Yessir.
Well let's take a look.
Torbert opened the trunk and they stood looking at the body. The front of the man's shirt was
covered with blood, partly dried. His whole face was bloody. Bell leaned and reached into the
trunk and took something from the man's shirtpocket and unfolded it. It was a bloodstained
receipt for gas from a service station in Junction Texas. Well, he said. This was the end of the
road for Bill Wyrick.
I didnt look to see if he had a billfold on him.
That's all right. He dont. This here was just dumb luck.
He studied the hole in the man's forehead. Looks like a .45. Clean. Almost like a wadcutter.
What's a wadcutter?
It's a target round. You got the keys?
Yessir.
Bell shut the trunklid. He looked around. Passing trucks on the interstate were downshifting
as they approached. I've already talked to Lamar. Told him he can have his unit back in about
three days. I called Austin and they're lookin for you first thing in the mornin. I aint loadin
him into one of our units and he damn sure dont need a helicopter. You take Lamar's unit
back to Sonora when you get done and call and me or Wendell one will come and get you.
You got any money?
Yessir.
Fill out the report same as any report.
Yessir.
White male, late thirties, medium build.
How do you spell Wyrick?
You dont spell it. We dont know what his name is.
Yessir.
He might have a family someplace.
Yessir. Sheriff?
Yes.
What do we have on the perpetrator?
We dont. Give Wendell your keys fore you forget it.
They're in the unit.
Well let's not be leavin keys in the units.
Yessir.
I'll see you in two days' time.
Yessir.
I hope that son of a bitch is in California.
Yessir. I know what you mean.
I got a feelin he aint.
Yessir. I do too.
Wendell, you ready?
Wendell leaned and spat. Yessir, he said. I'm ready. He looked at Torbert. You get stopped
with that old boy in the turtle just tell em you dont know nothin about it. Tell em somebody
must of put him in there while you was havin coffee.
Torbert nodded. You and the sheriff goin to come down and get me off of death row?
If we cant get you out we'll get in there with you.
You all dont be makin light of the dead thataway, Bell said.
Wendell nodded. Yessir, he said. You're right. I might be one myself some day.
Driving out 90 toward the turnoff at Dryden he came across a hawk dead in the road. He saw
the feathers move in the wind. He pulled over and got out and walked back and squatted on
his bootheels and looked at it. He raised one wing and let it fall again. Cold yellow eye dead
to the blue vault above them.
It was a big redtail. He picked it up by one wingtip and carried it to the bar ditch and laid it in
the grass. They would hunt the blacktop, sitting on the high powerpoles and watching the
highway in both directions for miles. Any small thing that might venture to cross. Closing on
their prey against the sun. Shadowless. Lost in the concentration of the hunter. He wouldnt
have the trucks running over it.
He stood there looking out across the desert. So quiet. Low hum of wind in the wires. High
bloodweeds along the road. Wiregrass and sacahuista. Beyond in the stone arroyos the tracks
of dragons. The raw rock mountains shadowed in the late sun and to the east the shimmering
abscissa of the desert plains under a sky where raincurtains hung dark as soot all along the
quadrant. That god lives in silence who has scoured the following land with salt and ash. He
walked back to the cruiser and got in and pulled away.
When he pulled up in front of the sheriff's office in Sonora the first thing he saw was the
yellow tape stretched across the parking lot. A small courthouse crowd. He got out and
crossed the street.
What's happened, Sheriff?
I dont know, said Bell. I just got here.
He ducked under the tape and went up the steps. Lamar looked up when he tapped at the door.
Come in, Ed Tom, he said. Come in. We got hell to pay here.
They walked out on the courthouse lawn. Some of the men followed them.
You all go on, said Lamar. Me and the sheriff here need to talk.
He looked haggard. He looked at Bell and he looked at the ground. He shook his head and
looked away. I used to play mumbledypeg here when I was a boy. Right here. These
youngsters today I dont think would even know what that was. Ed Tom this is a damned
lunatic.
I hear you.
You got anything to go on?
Not really.
Lamar looked away. He wiped his eyes with the back of his sleeve. I'll tell you right now.
This son of a bitch will never see a day in court. Not if I catch him he wont.
Well, we need to catch him first.
That boy was married.
I didnt know that.
Twenty-three year old. Clean cut boy. Straight as a die. Now I got to go out to his house fore
his wife hears it on the damn radio.
I dont envy you that. I surely dont.
I think I'm goin to quit, Ed Tom.
You want me to go out there with you?
No. I appreciate it. I need to go.
All right.
I just have this feelin we're looking at somethin we really aint never even seen before.
I got the same feelin. Let me call you this evenin.
I appreciate it.
He watched Lamar cross the lawn and climb the steps to his office. I hope you dont quit, he
said. I think we're goin to need all of you we can get.
WHEN THEY PULLED up in front of the cafe it was one-twenty in the morning. There were
only three people on the bus.
Sanderson, the driver said.
Moss made his way forward. He'd seen the driver eyeing him in the mirror. Listen, he said.
Do you think you could let me out down at the Desert Aire? I got a bad leg and I live down
there but I got nobody to pick me up.
The driver shut the door. Yeah, he said. I can do that.
When he walked in she got up off the couch and ran and put her arms around his neck. I
thought you was dead, she said.
Well I aint so dont go to slobberin.
I aint.
Why dont you fix me some bacon and eggs while I take a shower.
Let me see that cut on your head. What happened to you? Where's your truck at?
I need to take a shower. Fix me somethin to eat. My stomach thinks my throat's been cut.
When he came out of the shower he was wearing a pair of shorts and when he sat at the little
formica table in the kitchen the first thing she said was What's that on the back of your arm?
How many eggs is this?
Four.
You got any more toast?
They's two more pieces comin. What is that, Llewelyn?
What would you like to hear?
The truth.
He sipped his coffee and set about salting his eggs.
You aint goin to tell me, are you?
No.
What happened to your leg?
It's broke out in a rash.
She buttered the fresh toast and put it on the plate and sat in the chair opposite. I like to eat
breakfast of a night, he said. Takes me back to my bachelor days.
What is goin on, Llewelyn?
Here's what's goin on, Carla Jean. You need to get your stuff packed and be ready to roll out
of here come daylight. Whatever you leave you aint goin to see it again so if you want it dont
leave it. There's a bus leaves out of here at seven-fifteen in the mornin. I want you to go to
Odessa and wait there till I can call you.
She sat back in the chair and watched him. You want me to go to Odessa, she said.
That's correct.
You aint kiddin, are you?
Me? No. I aint kiddin a bit. Are we out of preserves?
She got up and got the preserves out of the refrigerator and set them on the table and sat back
down. He unscrewed the jar and ladled some onto his toast and spread it with his knife.
What's in that satchel you brought in?
I told you what was in that satchel.
You said it was full of money.
Well then I reckon that's what's in it.
Where's it at?
Under the bed in the back room.
Under the bed.
Yes mam.
Can I go back there and look?
You're free white and twenty-one so I reckon you can do whatever you want.
I aint twenty-one.
Well whatever you are.
And you want me to get on a bus and go to Odessa.
You are gettin on a bus and goin to Odessa.
What am I supposed to tell Mama?
Well, try standin in the door and hollerin: Mama, I'm home.
Where's your truck at?
Gone the way of all flesh. Nothin's forever.
How are we supposed to get down there in the mornin?
Call Miss Rosa over yonder. She aint got nothin to do.
What have you done, Llewelyn?
I robbed the bank at Fort Stockton.
You're a lyin sack of you know what.
If you aint goin to believe me what'd you ask me for? You need to get on back there and get
your stuff together. We got about four hours till daylight.
Let me see that thing on your arm.
You done seen it.
Let me put somethin on it.
Yeah, I think there's some buckshot salve in the cabinet if we aint out. Will you go on and
quit aggravatin me? I'm tryin to eat.
Did you get shot?
No. I just said that to get you stirred up. Go on now.
HE CROSSED THE Pecos River just north of Sheffield Texas and took route 349 south.
When he pulled into the filling station at Sheffield it was almost dark. A long red twilight
with doves crossing the highway heading south toward some ranch tanks. He got change from
the proprietor and made a phone call and filled the tank and went back in and paid.
You all gettin any rain up your way? the proprietor said.
Which way would that be?
I seen you was from Dallas.
Chigurh picked his change up off the counter. And what business is it of yours where I'm
from, friendo?
I didnt mean nothin by it.
You didnt mean nothing by it.
I was just passin the time of day.
I guess that passes for manners in your cracker view of things.
Well sir, I apologized. If you dont want to accept my apology I dont know what else I can do
for you.
How much are these?
Sir?
I said how much are these.
Sixty-nine cents.
Chigurh unfolded a dollar onto the counter. The man rang it up and stacked the change before
him the way a dealer places chips. Chigurh hadnt taken his eyes from him. The man looked
away. He coughed. Chigurh opened the plastic package of cashews with his teeth and doled a
third part of them into his palm and stood eating.
Will there be somethin else? the man said.
I dont know. Will there?
Is there somethin wrong?
With what?
With anything.
Is that what you're asking me? Is there something wrong with anything?
The man turned away and put his fist to his mouth and coughed again. He looked at Chigurh
and he looked away. He looked out the window at the front of the store. The gas pumps and
the car sitting there. Chigurh ate another small handful of the cashews.
Will there be anything else?
You've already asked me that.
Well I need to see about closin.
See about closing.
Yessir.
What time do you close?
Now. We close now.
Now is not a time. What time do you close.
Generally around dark. At dark.
Chigurh stood slowly chewing. You dont know what you're talking about, do you?
Sir?
I said you dont know what you're talking about do you.
I'm talkin about closin. That's what I'm talkin about.
What time do you go to bed.
Sir?
You're a bit deaf, arent you? I said what time do you go to bed.
Well. I'd say around nine-thirty. Somewhere around nine-thirty.
Chigurh poured more cashews into his palm. I could come back then, he said.
We'll be closed then.
That's all right.
Well why would you be comin back? We'll be closed.
You said that.
Well we will.
You live in that house behind the store?
Yes I do.
You've lived here all your life?
The proprietor took a while to answer. This was my wife's father's place, he said. Originally.
You married into it.
We lived in Temple Texas for many years. Raised a family there. In Temple. We come out
here about four years ago.
You married into it.
If that's the way you want to put it.
I dont have some way to put it. That's the way it is.
Well I need to close now.
Chigurh poured the last of the cashews into his palm and wadded the little bag and placed it
on the counter. He stood oddly erect, chewing.
You seem to have a lot of questions, the proprietor said. For somebody that dont want to say
where it is they're from.
What's the most you ever saw lost on a coin toss?
Sir?
I said what's the most you ever saw lost on a coin toss.
Coin toss?
Coin toss.
I dont know. Folks dont generally bet on a coin toss. It's usually more like just to settle
somethin.
What's the biggest thing you ever saw settled?
I dont know.
Chigurh took a twenty-five cent piece from his pocket and flipped it spinning into the bluish
glare of the fluorescent lights overhead. He caught it and slapped it onto the back of his
forearm just above the bloody wrappings. Call it, he said.
Call it?
Yes.
For what?
Just call it.
Well I need to know what it is we're callin here.
How would that change anything?
The man looked at Chigurh's eyes for the first time. Blue as lapis. At once glistening and
totally opaque. Like wet stones. You need to call it, Chigurh said. I cant call it for you. It
wouldnt be fair. It wouldnt even be right. Just call it.
I didnt put nothin up.
Yes you did. You've been putting it up your whole life. You just didnt know it. You know
what the date is on this coin?
No.
It's nineteen fifty-eight. It's been traveling twenty-two years to get here. And now it's here.
And I'm here. And I've got my hand over it. And it's either heads or tails. And you have to
say. Call it.
I dont know what it is I stand to win.
In the blue light the man's face was beaded thinly with sweat. He licked his upper lip.
You stand to win everything, Chigurh said. Everything.
You aint makin any sense, mister.
Call it.
Heads then.
Chigurh uncovered the coin. He turned his arm slightly for the man to see. Well done, he said.
He picked the coin from his wrist and handed it across.
What do I want with that?
Take it. It's your lucky coin.
I dont need it.
Yes you do. Take it.
The man took the coin. I got to close now, he said.
Dont put it in your pocket.
Sir?
Dont put it in your pocket.
Where do you want me to put it?
Dont put it in your pocket. You wont know which one it is.
All right.
Anything can be an instrument, Chigurh said. Small things. Things you wouldnt even notice.
They pass from hand to hand. People dont pay attention. And then one day there's an
accounting. And after that nothing is the same. Well, you say. It's just a coin. For instance.
Nothing special there. What could that be an instrument of? You see the problem. To separate
the act from the thing. As if the parts of some moment in history might be interchangeable
with the parts of some other moment. How could that be? Well, it's just a coin. Yes. That's
true. Is it?
Chigurh cupped his hand and scooped his change from the counter into his palm and put the
change in his pocket and turned and walked out the door. The proprietor watched him go.
Watched him get into the car. The car started and pulled off from the gravel apron onto the
highway south. The lights never did come on. He laid the coin on the counter and looked at it.
He put both hands on the counter and just stood leaning there with his head bowed.
When he got to Dryden it was about eight oclock. He sat at the intersection in front of
Condra's Feed Store with the lights off and the motor running. Then he turned the lights on
and pulled out on highway 90 headed east.
The white marks at the side of the road when he found them looked like surveyor's marks but
there were no numbers, just the chevrons. He marked the mileage on the odometer and drove
another mile and slowed and turned off the highway. He shut off the lights and left the motor
running and got out and walked down and opened the gate and came back. He drove across
the bars of the cattleguard and got out and closed the gate again and stood there listening.
Then he got in the car and drove out down the rutted track.
He followed a southrunning fence, the Ford wallowing over the bad ground. The fence was
just an old remnant, three wires strung on mesquite posts. In a mile or so he came out on a
gravel plain where a Dodge Ramcharger was parked facing toward him. He pulled slowly
alongside it and shut down the engine.
The Ramcharger's windows were tinted so dark they looked black. Chigurh opened the door
and got out. A man got out on the passenger side of the Dodge and folded the seat forward
and climbed into the rear. Chigurh walked around the vehicle and got in and shut the door.
Let's go, he said.
Have you talked to him? the driver said.
No.
He dont know what's happened?
No. Let's go.
They rolled out across the desert in the dark.
When do you aim to tell him? the driver said.
When I know what it is that I'm telling him.
When they came to Moss's truck Chigurh leaned forward to study it.
Is that his truck?
That's it. Plates is gone.
Pull up here. Have you got a screwdriver?
Look in the jockeybox there.
Chigurh got out with the screwdriver and walked over to the truck and opened the door. He
pried the aluminum inspection plate off of the rivets inside the door and put it in his pocket
and came back and got in and put the screwdriver back in the glovebox. Who cut the tires? he
said.
It wasnt us.
Chigurh nodded. Let's go, he said.
They parked some distance from the trucks and walked down to look at them. Chigurh stood
there a long time. It was cold out on the barrial and he had no jacket but he didnt seem to
notice. The other two men stood waiting. He had a flashlight in his hand and he turned it on
and walked among the trucks and looked at the bodies. The two men followed at a small
distance.
Whose dog? Chigurh said.
We dont know.
He stood looking in at the dead man slumped across the console of the Bronco. He shone the
light into the cargo space behind the seats.
Where's the box? he said.
It's in the truck. You want it?
Can you get anything on it?
No.
Nothing?
Not a bleep.
Chigurh studied the dead man. He jostled him with his flashlight.
These are some ripe petunias, one of the men said.
Chigurh didnt answer. He backed out of the truck and stood looking over the bajada in the
moonlight. Dead quiet. The man in the Bronco had not been dead three days or anything like
it. He pulled the pistol from the waistband of his trousers and turned around to where the two
men were standing and shot them once each through the head in rapid succession and put the
gun back in his belt. The second man had actually half turned to look at the first as he fell.
Chigurh stepped between them and bent and pulled away the shoulder-strap from the second
man and swung up the nine millimeter Glock he'd been carrying and walked back out to the
vehicle and got in and started it and backed around and drove up out of the caldera and back
toward the highway.
III
I DONT KNOW THAT law enforcement benefits all that much from new technology. Tools
that comes into our hands comes into theirs too. Not that you can go back. Or that you'd even
want to. We used to have them old Motorola two way radios. We've had the high-band now
for several years. Some things aint changed. Common sense aint changed. I'll tell my deputies
sometimes to just follow the breadcrumbs. I still like the old Colts. .44-40. If that wont stop
him you'd better throw the thing down and take off runnin. I like the old Winchester model 97.
I like it that it's got a hammer. I dont like havin to hunt the safety on a gun. Of course some
things is worse. That cruiser of mine is seven years old. It's got the 454 in it. You cant get that
engine no more. I drove one of the new ones. It wouldnt outrun a fatman. I told the man I
thought I'd stick with what I had. That aint always a good policy. But it aint always a bad one
neither.
This other thing I dont know. People will ask me about it ever so often. I cant say as I would
rule it out altogether. It aint somethin I would like to have to see again. To witness. The ones
that really ought to be on death row will never make it. I believe that. You remember certain
things about a thing like that. People didnt know what to wear. There was one or two come
dressed in black, which I suppose was all right. Some of the men come just in their
shirtsleeves and that kindly bothered me. I aint sure I could tell you why.
Still they seemed to know what to do and that surprised me. Most of em I know had never
been to a execution before. When it was over they pulled this curtain around the gas-chamber
with him in there settin slumped over and people just got up and filed out. Like out of church
or somethin. It just seemed peculiar. Well it was peculiar. I'd have to say it was probably the
most unusual day I ever spent.
Quite a few people didnt believe in it. Even them that worked on the row. You'd be surprised.
Some of em I think had at one time. You see somebody ever day sometimes for years and then
one day you walk that man down the hallway and put him to death. Well. That'll take some of
the cackle out of just about anybody. I dont care who it is. And of course some of them boys
was not very bright. Chaplain Pickett told me about one he ministered to and he ate his last
meal and he'd ordered this dessert, ever what it was. And it come time to go and Pickett he
asked him didnt he want his dessert and the old boy told him he was savin it for when he come
back. I dont know what to say about that. Pickett didnt neither.
I never had to kill nobody and I am very glad of that fact. Some of the old time sheriffs
wouldnt even carry a firearm. A lot of folks find that hard to believe but it's a fact. Jim
Scarborough never carried one. That's the younger Jim. Gaston Boykins wouldnt wear one.
Up in Comanche County. I always liked to hear about the old timers. Never missed a chance
to do so. The old time concern that the sheriffs had for their people is been watered down
some. You cant help but feel it. Nigger Hoskins over in Bastrop County knowed everbody's
phone number in the whole county by heart.
It's a odd thing when you come to think about it. The opportunities for abuse are just about
everwhere. There's no requirements in the Texas State Constitution for bein a sheriff. Not a
one. There is no such thing as a county law. You think about a job where you have pretty
much the same authority as God and there is no requirements put upon you and you are
charged with preservin nonexistent laws and you tell me if that's peculiar or not. Because I
say that it is. Does it work? Yes. Ninety percent of the time. It takes very little to govern good
people. Very little. And bad people cant be governed at all. Or if they could I never heard of
it.
THE BUS PULLED INTO Fort Stockton at quarter to nine and Moss stood and got his bag
down from the overhead rack and picked up the document case out of the seat and stood
looking down at her.
Dont get on a airplane with that thing, she said. They'll put you under the jail.
My mama didnt raise no ignorant children.
When are you goin to call me.
I'll call you in a few days.
All right.
You take care.
I got a bad feelin, Llewelyn.
Well, I got a good one. So they ought to balance out.
I hope so.
I cant call you except from a payphone.
I know it. Call me.
I will. Quit worryin about everthing.
Llewelyn?
What.
Nothin.
What is it.
Nothin. I just wanted to say it. You take care. Llewelyn? What.
Dont hurt nobody. You hear?
He stood there with the bag slung across his shoulder. I aint makin no promises, he said.
That's how you get hurt.
BELL HAD RAISED the first forkful of his supper to his mouth when the phone rang. He
lowered it again. She'd started to push her chair back but he wiped his mouth with his napkin
and rose. I'll get it, he said.
All right.
How the hell do they know when you're eatin? We never eat this late.
Dont be cussin, she said.
He picked up the phone. Sheriff Bell, he said.
He listened for a while. Then he said: I'm goin to finish my supper. I'll meet you there in
about forty minutes. Just leave the lights on on your unit.
He hung up the phone and came back to his chair and sat and picked up the napkin and put it
in his lap and picked up his fork. Somebody called in a car afire, he said. Just this side of
Lozier Canyon.
What do you make of that?
He shook his head.
He ate. He drank the last of his coffee. Come go with me, he said.
Let me get my coat.
They pulled off the road at the gate and drove over the cattleguard and pulled up behind
Wendell's unit. Wendell walked back and Bell rolled down the window.
It's about a half mile down, Wendell said. Just follow me.
I can see it.
Yessir. It was goin real good here about a hour ago. The people that called it in seen it from
the road.
They parked a little way off and got out and stood looking at it. You could feel the heat on
your face. Bell came around and opened the door and took his wife's hand. She got out and
stood with her arms folded in front of her. There was a pickup truck parked a ways down and
two men were standing there in the dull red glare. They nodded each in turn and said Sheriff.
We could of brought weeners, she said.
Yeah. Marshmallers.
You wouldnt think a car would burn like that.
No, you wouldnt. Did you all see anything?
No sir. Just the fire.
Didnt pass nobody or nothin?
No sir.
Does that look to you like about a '77 Ford, Wendell?
It could be.
I'd say it is.
Was that what the old boy was drivin?
Yeah. Dallas plates.
It wasnt his day, was it Sheriff.
It surely wasnt.
Why do you reckon they set fire to it?
I dont know.
Wendell turned and spat. Wasnt what the old boy had in mind when he left Dallas I dont
reckon, was it?
Bell shook his head. No, he said. I'd guess it was about the farthest thing from his mind.
In the morning when he got to the office the phone was ringing. Torbert wasnt back yet. He
finally called at nine-thirty and Bell sent Wendell to get him. Then he sat with his feet on the
desk staring at his boots. He sat that way for some time. Then he picked up the mobile and
called Wendell.
Where you at?
Just past Sanderson Canyon.
Turn around and come back.
All right. What about Torbert?
Call him and tell him to just set tight. I'll come get him this afternoon.
Yessir.
Go to the house and get the keys to the truck from Loretta and hook up the horsetrailer.
Saddle my horse and Loretta's and load and I'll see you out there in about a hour.
Yessir.
He hung up the speaker and got up and went down to check on the jail.
They drove through the gate and closed it again and drove down along the fence about a
hundred feet and parked. Wendell unlatched the trailer doors and led the horses out. Bell took
the reins of his wife's horse. You ride Winston, he said.
You sure?
Oh I'm more than sure. Anything happens to Loretta's horse I can tell you right now you damn
sure dont want to be the party that was aboard him.
He handed Wendell one of the lever action rifles he'd brought and swung up into the saddle
and pulled his hat down. You ready? he said.
They rode side by side. We've drove all through their tracks but you can still see what it was,
Bell said. Big offroad tires.
When they got to the car it was just a blackened hulk.
You were right about the plates, Wendell said.
I lied about the tires though.
How's that.
I said they'd still be burnin.
The car sat in what looked like four puddles of tar, the wheels wrapped in blackened skeins of
wire. They rode on. Bell pointed at the ground from time to time. You can tell the day tracks
from the night ones, he said. They were drivin out here with no lights. See there how crooked
the track is? Like you can just see far enough ahead to duck the brush in front of you. Or you
might leave some paint on a rock like that right yonder.
In a sandwash he got down and walked up and back and then looked away toward the south.
It's the same tire tread comin back as was goin down. Made about the same time. You can see
the stripes real clear. Which way they're a goin. They's two or more trips each way, I'd say.
Wendell sat his horse, his hands crossed on the big roping pommel. He leaned and spat. He
looked off to the south with the sheriff. What do you reckon it is we're fixin to find down
here?
I dont know, Bell said. He put his foot in the stirrup and stood easily up into the saddle and
put the little horse forward. I dont know, he said again. But I cant say as I'm much lookin
forward to it.
When they reached Moss's truck the sheriff sat and studied it and then rode slowly around it.
Both doors were open.
Somebody's pried the inspection plate off the door, he said.
The numbers is on the frame.
Yeah. I dont think that's why they took it.
I know that truck.
I do too.
Wendell leaned and patted the horse on the neck. The boy's name is Moss.
Yep.
Bell rode back around the rear of the truck and turned the horse to the south and looked at
Wendell. You know where he lives at?
No sir.
He's married, aint he.
I believe he is.
The sheriff sat looking at the truck. I was just thinkin it'd be a curious thing if he was missin
two or three days and nobody said nothin about it.
Pretty curious.
Bell looked down toward the caldera. I think we got some real mischief here.
I hear you, Sheriff.
You think this boy's a doperunner?
I dont know. I wouldnt of thought it.
I wouldnt either. Let's go down here and look at the rest of this mess.
They rode down into the caldera carrying the Winchesters upright before them in the
saddlebow. I hope this boy aint dead down here, Bell said. He seemed a decent enough boy
the time or two I seen him. Pretty wife too.
They rode past the bodies on the ground and stopped and got down and dropped the reins. The
horses stepped nervously.
Let's take the horses out yonder a ways, Bell said. They dont need to see this.
Yessir.
When he came back Bell handed him two billfolds he'd taken from the bodies. He looked
toward the trucks.
These two aint been dead all that long, he said.
Where they from?
Dallas.
He handed Wendell a pistol he'd picked up and then he squatted and leaned on the rifle he was
carrying. These two is been executed, he said. One of their own, I'd say. Old boy never even
got the safety off that pistol. Both of em shot between the eyes.
The othern didnt have a gun?
Killer could of took it. Or he might not of had one.
Bad way to go to a gunfight.
Bad way.
They walked among the trucks. These sumbitches are bloody as hogs, Wendell said.
Bell glanced at him.
Yeah, Wendell said. I guess you ought to be careful about cussin the dead.
I would say at the least there probably aint no luck in it.
It's just a bunch of Mexican drugrunners.
They were. They aint now.
I aint sure what you're sayin.
I'm just sayin that whatever they were the only thing they are now is dead.
I'll have to sleep on that.
The sheriff tilted forward the Bronco seat and looked in the rear. He wet his finger and
pressed it to the carpet and held his finger to the light. That's been some of that old mexican
brown dope in the back of this rig.
Long gone now though, aint it.
Long gone.
Wendell squatted and studied the ground under the door. It looks like there's some more here
on the ground. Could be that somebody cut into one of the packages. See what was inside.
Could of been checkin the quality. Gettin ready to trade.
They didnt trade. They shot each other.
Bell nodded.
There might not of even been no money.
That's possible.
But you dont believe it.
Bell thought about it. No, he said. Probably I dont.
There was a second mix-up out here.
Yes, Bell said. At least that.
He rose and pushed the seat back. This good citizen's been shot between the eyes too.
Yep.
They walked around the truck. Bell pointed.
That's been a machinegun, them straight runs yonder.
I'd say it has. So where do you reckon the driver got to?
It's probably one of them layin in the grass yonder.
Bell had taken out his kerchief and he held it across his nose and reached in and picked up a
number of brass shell-casings out of the floor and looked at the numbers stamped in the base.
What calibers you got there, Sheriff?
Nine millimeter. A couple of .45 ACP's.
He dropped the shells back into the floor and stepped back and picked up his rifle from where
he'd leaned it against the vehicle. Somebody's unloaded on this thing with a shotgun by the
look of it.
You think them holes are big enough?
I dont think they're double ought. More likely number four buck.
More buck for your bang.
You could put it that way. You want to clean out a alley that's a pretty good way to go.
Wendell looked over the caldera. Well, he said. Somebody's walked away from here.
I'd say they have.
How come do you reckon the coyotes aint been at them?
Bell shook his head. I dont know, he said. Supposedly they wont eat a Mexican.
Them over yonder aint Mexican.
Well, that's true.
It must of sounded like Vietnam out here.
Vietnam, the sheriff said.
They walked out between the trucks. Bell picked up a few more casings and looked at them
and dropped them again. He picked up a blue plastic speedloader. He stood and looked over
the scene. I'll tell you what, he said.
Tell me.
It dont much stand to reason that the last man never even got hit.
I would agree with that.
Why dont we get the horses and just ride up here a ways and look around. Maybe cut for sign
a little.
We can do that.
Can you tell me what they wanted with a dog out here?
I got no idea.
When they found the dead man in the rocks a mile to the northeast Bell just sat his wife's
horse. He sat there for a long time.
What are you thinkin, Sheriff?
The sheriff shook his head. He got down and walked over to where the dead man lay slumped.
He walked over the ground, the rifle yoked across his shoulders. He squatted and studied the
grass.
We got another execution here Sheriff?
No, I believe this one's died of natural causes.
Natural causes?
Natural to the line of work he's in.
He aint got a gun.
No.
Wendell leaned and spat. Somebody's been here before us.
I'd say so.
You think he was packin the money?
I'd say there's a good chance of it.
So we still aint found the last man, have we?
Bell didnt answer. He rose and stood looking out over the country.
It's a mess, aint it Sheriff?
If it aint it'll do till a mess gets here.
They rode back across the upper end of the caldera. They sat the horses and looked down at
Moss's truck.
So where do you think this good old boy is at? Wendell said.
I do not know.
I would take it his whereabouts is pretty high on your worklist.
The sheriff nodded. Pretty high, he said.
They drove back to town and the sheriff sent Wendell on to the house with the truck and the
horses.
You be sure and rap on the kitchen door and thank Loretta.
I will. I got to give her the keys anyways.
The county dont pay her to use her horse.
I hear you.
He called Torbert on the mobile phone. I'm comin to get you, he said. Just set tight.
When he pulled up in front of Lamar's office the police tape was still strung across the
courthouse lawn. Torbert was sitting on the steps. He got up and walked out to the car.
You all right? Bell said.
Yessir.
Where's Sheriff Lamar?
He's out on a call.
They drove out toward the highway. Bell told the deputy about the caldera. Torbert listened in
silence. He rode looking out the window. After a while he said: I got the report from Austin.
What do they say.
Not much of anything.
What was he shot with?
They dont know.
They dont know?
No sir.
How can they not know? There wasnt no exit wound.
Yessir. They freely admitted that.
Freely admitted?
Yessir.
Well what the hell did they say, Torbert?
They said that he had what looked to be a large caliber bullet wound in the forehead and that
said wound had penetrated to a distance of approximately two and a half inches through the
skull and into the frontal lobe of the brain but that there was not no bullet to be found.
Said wound.
Yessir.
Bell pulled out onto the interstate. He drummed his fingers on the steering wheel. He looked
at his deputy.
What you're sayin dont make no sense, Torbert.
I told em that.
To which they responded?
They didnt respond nothin. They're sendin the report FedEx. X-rays and everthing. They said
you'd have it in your office by in the mornin.
They rode along in silence. After a while Torbert said: This whole thing is just hell in
spectacles, aint it Sheriff.
Yes it is.
How many bodies is it altogether?
Good question. I aint sure I even counted. Eight. Nine with Deputy Haskins.
Torbert studied the country out there. The shadows long on the road. Who the hell are these
people? he said.
I dont know. I used to say they were the same ones we've always had to deal with. Same ones
my grandaddy had to deal with. Back then they was rustlin cattle. Now they're runnin dope.
But I dont know as that's true no more. I'm like you. I aint sure we've seen these people
before. Their kind. I dont know what to do about em even. If you killed em all they'd have to
build a annex on to hell.
Chigurh pulled in to the Desert Aire shortly before noon and parked just below Moss's trailer
and shut off the engine. He got out and walked across the raw dirt yard and climbed the steps
and tapped at the aluminum door. He waited. Then he tapped again. He turned and stood with
his back to the trailer and studied the little park. Nothing moved. Not a dog. He turned and put
his wrist to the doorlock and shot out the lock cylinder with the cobalt steel plunger of the
cattlegun and opened the door and went in and shut the door behind him.
He stood, the deputy's revolver in his hand. He looked in the kitchen. He walked back into the
bedroom. He walked through the bedroom and pushed open the bathroom door and went into
the second bedroom. Clothes on the floor. The closet door open. He opened the top dresser
drawer and closed it again. He put the gun back in his belt and pulled his shirt over it and
walked back out to the kitchen.
He opened the refrigerator and took out a carton of milk and opened it and smelled it and
drank. He stood there holding the carton in one hand and looking out the window. He drank
again and then he put the carton back in the refrigerator and shut the door.
He went into the livingroom and sat on the sofa. There was a perfectly good twenty-one inch
television on the table. He looked at himself in the dead gray screen.
He rose and got the mail off the floor and sat back down and went through it. He folded three
of the envelopes and put them in his shirtpocket and then rose and went out.
He drove down and parked in front of the office and went in. Yessir, the woman said.
I'm looking for Llewelyn Moss.
She studied him. Did you go up to his trailer?
Yes I did.
Well I'd say he's at work. Did you want to leave a message?
Where does he work?
Sir I aint at liberty to give out no information about our residents.
Chigurh looked around at the little plywood office. He looked at the woman.
Where does he work.
Sir?
I said where does he work.
Did you not hear me? We cant give out no information.
A toilet flushed somewhere. A doorlatch clicked. Chigurh looked at the woman again. Then
he went out and got in the Ramcharger and left.
He pulled in at the cafe and took the envelopes out of his shirtpocket and unfolded them and
opened them and read the letters inside. He opened the phone bill and looked at the charges.
There were calls to Del Rio and to Odessa.
He went in and got some change and went to the payphone and dialed the Del Rio number but
there was no answer. He called the Odessa number and a woman answered and he asked for
Llewelyn. The woman said he wasnt there.
I tried to reach him in Sanderson but I dont believe he's there anymore.
There was a silence. Then the woman said: I dont know where he's at. Who is this?
Chigurh hung up the phone and went over to the counter and sat down and ordered a cup of
coffee. Has Llewelyn been in? he said.
When he pulled up in front of the garage there were two men sitting with their backs to the
wall of the building eating their lunches. He went in. There was a man at the desk drinking
coffee and listening to the radio. Yessir, he said.
I was looking for Llewelyn.
He aint here.
What time do you expect him?
I dont know. He aint called in or nothin so your guess is as good as mine. He leaned his head
slightly. As if he'd get another look at Chigurh. Is there somethin I can help you with?
I dont think so.
Outside he stood on the broken oilstained pavement. He looked at the two men sitting at the
end of the building.
Do you know where Llewelyn is?
They shook their heads. Chigurh got into the Ramcharger and pulled out and went back
toward town.
The bus pulled into Del Rio in the early afternoon and Moss got his bags and climbed down.
He walked down to the cab-stand and opened the rear door of the cab parked there and got in.
Take me to a motel, he said.
The driver looked at him in the mirror. You got one in mind?
No. Just someplace cheap.
They drove out to a place called the Trail Motel and Moss got out with his bag and the
document case and paid the driver and went into the office. A woman was sitting watching
television. She got up and went around behind the desk.
Do you have a room?
I got more than one. How many nights?
I dont know.
We got a weekly rate is the reason I ask. Thirty-five dollars plus a dollar seventy-five tax.
Thirty-six seventy-five.
Thirty-six seventy-five.
Yessir.
For the week.
Yessir. For the week.
Is that your best rate?
Yessir. There's not no discounts on the weekly rate.
Well let's just take it one day at a time.
Yessir.
He got the key and walked down to the room and went in and shut the door and set the bags
on the bed. He closed the curtains and stood looking out through them at the squalid little
court. Dead quiet. He fastened the chain on the door and sat on the bed. He unzipped the
duffel bag and took out the machinepistol and laid it on the bedspread and lay down beside it.
When he woke it was late afternoon. He lay there looking at the stained asbestos ceiling. He
sat up and pulled off his boots and socks and examined the bandages on his heels. He went
into the bathroom and looked at himself in the mirror and he took off his shirt and examined
the back of his arm. It was discolored from shoulder to elbow. He walked back into the room
and sat on the bed again. He looked at the gun lying there. After a while he climbed up onto
the cheap wooden desk and with the blade of his pocketknife set to unscrewing the airduct
grille, putting the screws in his mouth one by one. Then he pulled the grille loose and laid it
on the desk and stood on his toes and looked into the duct.
He cut a length from the Venetian blind cord at the window and tied the end of the cord to the
case. Then he unlatched the case and counted out a thousand dollars and folded the money
and put it in his pocket and shut the case and fastened it and fastened the straps.
He got the clothes pole out of the closet, sliding the wire hangers off onto the floor, and stood
on the dresser again and pushed the case down the duct as far as he could reach. It was a tight
fit. He took the pole and pushed it again until he could just reach the end of the rope. He put
the grille back with its rack of dust and fastened the screws and climbed down and went into
the bathroom and took a shower. When he came out he lay on the bed in his shorts and pulled
the chenille spread over himself and over the submachinegun at his side. He pushed the safety
off. Then he went to sleep.
When he woke it was dark. He swung his legs over the edge of the bed and sat listening. He
rose and walked to the window and pulled the curtain back slightly and looked out. Deep
shadows. Silence. Nothing.
He got dressed and put the gun under the mattress with the safety still off and smoothed down
the dustskirt and sat on the bed and picked up the phone and called a cab.
He had to pay the driver an extra ten dollars to take him across the bridge to Ciudad Acua.
He walked the streets, looking into the shopwindows. The evening was soft and warm and in
the little alameda grackles were settling in the trees and calling to one another. He went into a
boot shop and looked at the exotics  crocodile and ostrich and elephant  but the quality of
the boots was nothing like the Larry Mahans that he wore. He went into a farmacia and
bought a tin of bandages and sat in the park and patched his raw feet. His socks were already
bloody. At the corner a cabdriver asked him if he wanted to go see the girls and Moss held up
his hand for him to see the ring he wore and kept on walking.
He ate in a restaurant with white tablecloths and waiters in white jackets. He ordered a glass
of red wine and a porterhouse steak. It was early and the restaurant was empty save for him.
He sipped the wine and when the steak came he cut into it and chewed slowly and thought
about his life.
He got back to the motel a little after ten and sat in the cab with the motor running while he
counted out money for the fare. He handed the bills across the seat and he started to get out
but he didnt. He sat there with his hand on the doorhandle. Drive me around to the side, he
said.
The driver put the shifter in gear. What room? he said.
Just drive me around. I want to see if somebody's here.
They drove slowly past his room. There was a gap in the curtains he was pretty sure he hadnt
left there. Hard to tell. Not that hard. The cab tolled slowly past. No cars in the lot that hadnt
been there. Keep going, he said.
The driver looked at him in the mirror.
Keep going, said Moss. Dont stop.
I dont want to get in some kind of a jackpot here, buddy.
Just keep going.
Why dont I let you out here and we wont argue about it.
I want you to take me to another motel.
Let's just call it square.
Moss leaned forward and held a hundred dollar bill across the seat. You're already in a
jackpot, he said. I'm tryin to get you out of it. Now take me to a motel.
The driver took the bill and tucked it into his shirtpocket and turned out of the lot and into the
street.
He spent the night at the Ramada Inn out on the highway and in the morning he went down
and ate breakfast in the diningroom and read the paper. Then he just sat there.
They wouldnt be in the room when the maids came to clean it.
Checkout time is eleven oclock.
They could have found the money and left.
Except of course that there were probably at least two parties looking for him and whichever
one this was it wasnt the other and the other wasnt going away either.
By the time he got up he knew that he was probably going to have to kill somebody. He just
didnt know who it was.
He took a cab and went into town and went into a sporting goods store and bought a twelve
gauge Winchester pump gun and a box of double ought buckshot shells. The box of shells
contained almost exactly the firepower of a claymore mine. He had them wrap the gun and he
left with it under his arm and walked up Pecan Street to a hardware store. There he bought a
hacksaw and a flat millfile and some miscellaneous items. A pair of pliers and a pair of
sidecutters. A screwdriver. Flashlight. A roll of duct tape.
He stood on the sidewalk with his purchases. Then he turned and walked back down the
street.
In the sporting goods store again he asked the same clerk if he had any aluminum tentpoles.
He tried to explain that he didnt care what kind of tent it was, he just needed the poles.
The clerk studied him. Whatever kind of tent it is, he said, we'd still have to special order
poles for it. You need to get the manufacturer and the model number.
You sell tents, right?
We got three different models.
Which one has got the most poles in it?
Well, I guess that would be our ten foot walltent. You can stand up in it. Well, some people
could stand up in it. It's got a six foot clearance at the ridge.
Let me have one.
Yessir.
He brought the tent from the stockroom and laid it on the counter. It came in an orange nylon
bag. Moss laid the shotgun and the bag of hardware on the counter and untied the strings and
pulled the tent from the bag together with the poles and cords.
It's all there, the clerk said.
What do I owe you.
It's one seventy-nine plus tax.
He laid two of the hundred dollar bills on the counter. The tentpoles were in a separate bag
and he pulled this out and put it with his other things. The clerk gave him his change and the
receipt and Moss gathered up the shotgun and his hardware purchases together with the
tentpoles and thanked him and turned and left. What about the tent? the clerk called.
In the room he unwrapped the shotgun and wedged it in an open drawer and held it and sawed
the barrel off just in front of the magazine. He squared up the cut with the file and smoothed it
and wiped out the muzzle of the barrel with a damp facecloth and set it aside. Then he sawed
off the stock in a line that left it with a pistol grip and sat on the bed and dressed the grip
smooth with the file. When he had it the way he wanted it he slid the forearm back and slid it
forward again and let the hammer down with his thumb and turned it sideways and looked at
it. It looked pretty good. He turned it over and opened the box of shells and fed the heavy
waxed loads into the magazine one by one. He jacked the slide back and chambered a shell
and lowered the hammer and then put one more round in the magazine and laid the gun across
his lap. It was less than two feet long.
He called the Trail Motel and told the woman to hold his room for him. Then he shoved the
gun and the shells and the tools under the mattress and went out again.
He went to Wal-Mart and bought some clothes and a small nylon zipper bag to put them in. A
pair of jeans and a couple of shirts and some socks. In the afternoon he went for a long walk
out along the lake, taking the cut-off gunbarrel and the stock with him in the bag. He slung the
barrel out into the water as far as he could throw it and he buried the stock under a ledge of
shale. There were deer moving away through the desert scrub. He heard them snort and he
could see them where they came out on a ridge a hundred yards away to stand looking back at
him. He sat on a gravel beach with the empty bag folded in his lap and watched the sun set.
Watched the land turn blue and cold. An osprey went down the lake. Then there was just the
darkness.
IV
I WAS SHERIFF OF this county when I was twenty-five. Hard to believe. My father was not a
lawman. Jack was my grandfather. Me and him was sheriff at the same time, him in Piano
and me here. I think he was pretty proud of that. I know I was. I was just back from the war. I
had some medals and stuff and of course people had got wind of that. I campaigned pretty
hard. You had to. I tried to be fair. Jack used to say that any time you're throwin dirt you're
losin ground but I think mostly it just wasnt in him. To speak ill of anybody. And I never did
mind bein like him. Me and my wife has been married thirty-one years. No children. We lost a
girl but I wont talk about that. I served two terms and then we moved to Denton Texas. Jack
used to say that bein sheriff was one of the best jobs you could have and bein a ex-sheriff one
of the worst. Maybe lots of things is like that. We stayed gone and stayed gone. I done
different things. Was a detective on the railroad for a while. By that time my wife wasnt all
that sure about us comin back here. About me runnin. But she seen I wanted to so that's what
we done. She's a better person than me, which I will admit to anybody that cares to listen. Not
that that's sayin a whole lot. She's a better person than anybody I know. Period.
People think they know what they want but they generally dont. Sometimes if they're lucky
they'll get it anyways. Me I was always lucky. My whole life. I wouldnt be here otherwise.
Scrapes I been in. But the day I seen her come out of Kerr's Mercantile and cross the street
and she passed me and I tipped my hat to her and got just almost a smile back, that was the
luckiest.
People complain about the bad things that happen to em that they dont deserve but they
seldom mention the good. About what they done to deserve them things. I dont recall that I
ever give the good Lord all that much cause to smile on me. But he did.
WHEN BELL WALKED INTO the cafe on Tuesday morning it was just daylight. He got his
paper and went to his table in the corner. The men he passed at the big table nodded to him
and said Sheriff. The waitress brought him his coffee and went back to the kitchen and
ordered his eggs. He sat stirring the coffee with his spoon although there was nothing to stir
since he drank it black. The Haskins boy's picture was on the front page of the Austin paper.
Bell read, shaking his head. His wife was twenty years old. You know what you could do for
her? Not a damn thing. Lamar had never lost a man in twenty some odd years. This is what he
would remember. This is what he'd be remembered for.
She came with his eggs and he folded the paper and laid it by.
He took Wendell with him and they drove down to the Desert Aire and stood at the door
while Wendell knocked.
Look at the lock, Bell said.
Wendell drew his pistol and opened the door. Sheriff's department, he called.
There aint nobody here.
No reason not to be careful.
That's right. No reason in the world.
They walked in and stood. Wendell would have holstered his pistol but Bell stopped him.
Let's just keep to that careful routine, he said.
Yessir.
He walked over and picked up a small brass slug off of the carpet and held it up.
What's that? said Wendell.
Cylinder out of the lock.
Bell passed his hand over the plywood of the room-divider. Here's where it hit at, he said. He
balanced the piece of brass in his palm and looked toward the door. You could weigh this
thing and measure the distance and the drop and calculate the speed.
I expect you could.
Pretty good speed.
Yessir. Pretty good speed.
They walked through the rooms. What do you think, Sheriff?
I believe they've done lit a shuck.
I do too.
Kindly in a hurry about it, too.
Yep.
He walked into the kitchen and opened the refrigerator and looked in and shut it again. He
looked in the freezer.
So when was he here, Sheriff?
Hard to say. We might of just missed him.
You think this boy has got any notion of the sorts of sons of bitches that are huntin him?
I dont know. He ought to. He seen the same things I seen and it made a impression on me.
They're in a world of trouble, aint they?
Yes they are.
Bell walked back into the livingroom. He sat on the sofa. Wendell stood in the doorway. He
was still holding the revolver in his hand. What are you thinkin? he said.
Bell shook his head. He didnt look up.
By Wednesday half of the State of Texas was on its way to Sanderson. Bell sat at his table in
the cafe and read the news. He lowered the paper and looked up. A man about thirty years old
that he'd never seen before was standing there. He introduced himself as a reporter for the San
Antonio Light. What's all this about, Sheriff? he said.
It appears to be a huntin accident.
Hunting accident?
Yessir.
How could it be a hunting accident? You're pulling my leg.
Let me ask you somethin.
All right.
Last year nineteen felony charges were filed in the Terrell County Court. How many of those
would you say were not drug related?
I dont know.
Two. In the meantime I got a county the size of Delaware that is full of people who need my
help. What do you think about that?
I dont know.
I dont either. Now I just need to eat my breakfast here. I got kindly a full day ahead.
He and Torbert drove out in Torbert's four wheel drive truck. All was as they'd left it. They
parked a ways from Moss's truck and waited. It's ten, Torbert said.
What?
It's ten. Deceased. We forgot about old Wyrick. It's ten.
Bell nodded. That we know about, he said.
Yessir. That we know about.
The helicopter arrived and circled and set down in a whirl of dust out on the bajada. Nobody
got out. They were waiting for the dust to blow away. Bell and Torbert watched the rotor
winding down.
The DEA agent's name was McIntyre. Bell knew him slightly and liked him about well
enough to nod to. He got out with a clipboard in his hand and walked toward them. He was
dressed in boots and hat and a Carhartt canvas jacket and he looked all right until he opened
his mouth.
Sheriff Bell, he said.
Agent McIntyre.
What vehicle is this?
It's a '72 Ford pickup.
McIntyre stood looking out down the bajada. He tapped the clipboard against his leg. He
looked at Bell. I'm happy to know that, he said. White in color.
I'd say white. Yes.
Could use a set of tires.
He went over and walked around the truck. He wrote on his clipboard. He looked inside. He
folded the seat forward and looked in the back.
Who cut the tires?
Bell was standing with his hands in his back pockets. He leaned and spat. Deputy Hays here
believes it was done by a rival party.
Rival party.
Yessir.
I thought these vehicles were all shot up.
They are.
But not this one.
Not this one.
McIntyre looked toward the chopper and he looked down the bajada toward the other
vehicles. Can I get a ride down there with you?
Sure you can.
They walked toward Torbert's truck. The agent looked at Bell and he tapped the clipboard
against his leg. You dont intend to make this easy, do you?
Hell, McIntyre. I'm just messin with you.
They walked around in the bajada looking at the shot-up trucks. McIntyre held a kerchief to
his nose. The bodies were bloated in their clothes. This is about the damnedest thing I ever
saw, he said.
He stood making notes on his clipboard. He paced distances and made a rough sketch of the
scene and he copied out the numbers off the license plates.
Were there no guns here? he said.
Not as many as there should of been. We got two pieces in evidence.
How long you think they've been dead?
Four or five days.
Somebody must have got away.
Bell nodded. There's another body about a mile north of here.
There's heroin spilled in the back of that Bronco.
Yep.
Mexican black tar.
Bell looked at Torbert. Torbert leaned and spat.
If the heroin is missing and the money is missing then my guess is that somebody is missing.
I'd say that's a reasonable guess.
McIntyre continued writing. Dont worry, he said. I know you didnt get it.
I aint worried.
McIntyre adjusted his hat and stood looking at the trucks. Are the rangers coming out here?
Rangers are comin. Or one is. DPS drug unit.
I've got .380's, .45's, nine millimeter parabellum, twelve gauge, and .38 special. Did you all
find anything else?
I think that was it.
McIntyre nodded. I guess the people waiting for their dope have probably figured out by now
that it's not coming. What about the Border Patrol?
Everbody's comin as far as I know. We expect it to get right lively. Might could be a bigger
draw than the flood back in '65.
Yeah.
What we need is to get these bodies out of here.
McIntyre tapped the clipboard against his leg. Aint that the truth, he said.
Nine millimeter parabellum, said Torbert.
Bell nodded. You need to put that in your files.
Chigurh picked up the signal from the transponder coming across the high span of the Devil's
River Bridge just west of Del Rio. It was near midnight and no cars on the highway. He
reached over into the passenger seat and turned the dial slowly forward and then back,
listening.
The headlights picked up some kind of a large bird sitting on the aluminum bridgerail up
ahead and Chigurh pushed the button to let the window down. Cool air coming in off the lake.
He took the pistol from beside the box and cocked and leveled it out the window, resting the
barrel on the rearview mirror. The pistol had been fitted with a silencer sweated onto the end
of the barrel. The silencer was made out of brass mapp-gas burners fitted into a hairspray can
and the whole thing stuffed with fiberglass roofing insulation and painted flat black. He fired
just as the bird crouched and spread its wings.
It flared wildly in the lights, very white, turning and lifting away into the darkness. The shot
had hit the rail and caromed off into the night and the rail hummed dully in the slipstream and
ceased. Chigurh laid the pistol in the seat and put the window back up again.
Moss paid the driver and stepped out into the lights in front of the motel office and slung the
bag over his shoulder and shut the cab door and turned and went in. The woman was already
behind the counter. He set the bag in the floor and leaned on the counter. She looked a little
flustered. Hi, she said. You fixin to stay a while?
I need another room.
You want to change rooms or you want another one besides the one you've got?
I want to keep the one I got and get another one.
All right.
Have you got a map of the motel?
She looked under the counter. There used to be a sort of a one. Wait a minute. I think this is it.
She laid an old brochure on the counter. It showed a car from the fifties parked in front. He
unfolded it and flattened it out and studied it.
What about one forty-two?
You can have one next to yours if you want it. One-twenty aint took.
That's all right. What about one forty-two?
She reached and got the key off the board behind her. You'll owe for two nights, she said.
He paid and picked up the bag and walked out and turned down the walkway at the rear of the
motel. She leaned over the counter watching him go.
In the room he sat on the bed with the map spread out. He got up and went into the bathroom
and stood in the tub with his ear to the wall. A TV was playing somewhere. He went back and
sat and unzipped the bag and took out the shotgun and laid it to one side and then emptied the
bag out onto the bed.
He took the screwdriver and got the chair from the desk and stood on it and unscrewed the
airduct grille and stepped down and laid it dustside up on the cheap chenille bedspread. Then
he climbed up and put his ear to the duct. He listened. He stood down and got the flashlight
and climbed back up again.
There was a junction in the ductwork about ten feet down the shaft and he could see the end
of the bag sticking out. He turned off the light and stood listening. He tried listening with his
eyes shut.
He climbed down and got the shotgun and went to the door and turned off the light at the
switch there and stood in the dark looking out through the curtain at the courtyard. Then he
went back and laid the shotgun on the bed and turned on the flashlight.
He untied the little nylon bag and slid the poles out. They were lightweight aluminum tubes
three feet long and he assembled three of them and taped the joints with duct tape so that they
wouldnt pull apart. He went to the closet and came back with three wire hangers and sat on
the bed and cut the hooks off with the sidecutters and wrapped them into one hook with the
tape. Then he taped them to the end of the pole and stood up and slid the pole down the
ductwork.
He turned the flashlight off and pitched it onto the bed and went back to the window and
looked out. Drone of a truck passing out on the highway. He waited till it was gone. A cat that
was crossing the courtyard stopped. Then it went on again.
He stood on the chair with the flashlight in his hand. He turned on the light and laid the lens
up close against the galvanized metal wall of the duct so as to mute the beam and ran the hook
down past the bag and turned it and brought it back. The hook caught and turned the bag
slightly and then slipped free again. After a few tries he managed to get it caught in one of the
straps and he towed it silently up the duct hand over hand through the dust until he could let
go the pole and reach the bag.
He climbed down and sat on the bed and wiped the dust from the case and unfastened the
latch and the straps and opened it and looked at the packets of bills. He took one of them from
the case and riffled it. Then he fitted it back and undid the length of cord he'd tied to the strap
and turned off the flashlight and sat listening. He stood and reached up and shoved the poles
down the duct and then he put back the grid and gathered up his tools. He laid the key on the
desk and put the shotgun and the tools in the bag and took it and the case and walked out the
door leaving everything just as it was.
Chigurh drove slowly along the row of motel rooms with the window down and the receiver
in his lap. He turned at the end of the lot and came back. He slowed to a stop and put the
Ramcharger in reverse and backed slightly down the blacktop and stopped again. Finally he
drove around to the office and parked and went in.
The clock on the motel office wall said twelve forty-two. The television set was on and the
woman looked like she'd been asleep. Yessir, she said. Can I help you?
He left the office with the key in his shirtpocket and got into the Ramcharger and drove
around to the side of the building and parked and got out and walked down to the room
carrying the bag with the receiver and the guns in it. In the room he dropped the bag onto the
bed and pulled off his boots and came back out with the receiver and the battery pack and the
shotgun from the truck. The shotgun was a twelve gauge Remington automatic with a plastic
military stock and a parkerized finish. It was fitted with a shopmade silencer fully a foot long
and big around as a beercan. He walked down the ramada in his sockfeet past the rooms
listening to the signal.
He came back to the room and stood in the open door under the dead white light from the
parking lot lamp. He walked into the bathroom and turned the light on there. He took the
measure of the room and looked to see where everything was. He measured where the
lightswitches were. Then he stood in the room taking it all in once again. He sat and pulled on
his boots and got the airtank and slung it across his shoulder and caught up the cattlegun
where it swung from the rubber airhose and walked out and down to the room.
He stood listening at the door. Then he punched out the lock cylinder with the airgun and
kicked open the door.
A Mexican in a green guayabera had sat up on the bed and was reaching for a small
machinegun beside him. Chigurh shot him three times so fast it sounded like one long gunshot
and left most of the upper part of him spread across the headboard and the wall behind it. The
shotgun made a strange deep chugging sound. Like someone coughing into a barrel. He
snapped on the light and stepped out of the doorway and stood with his back to the outside
wall. He looked in again quickly. The bathroom door had been shut. Now it was open. He
stepped into the room and fired two loads through the standing door and another through the
wall and stepped out again. Down toward the end of the building a light had come on.
Chigurh waited. Then he looked into the room once more. The door was blown into shredded
plywood hanging off the hinges and a thin stream of blood had started across the pink
bathroom tiles.
He stepped into the doorway and fired two more rounds through the bathroom wall and then
walked in with the shotgun leveled at his waist. The man was lying slumped against the tub
holding an AK-47. He was shot in the chest and the neck and he was bleeding heavily. No me
mate, he wheezed. No me mate. Chigurh stepped back to avoid the spray of ceramic chips off
the tub and shot him in the face.
He walked out and stood on the sidewalk. No one there. He went back in and searched the
room. He looked in the closet and he looked under the bed and he pulled all the drawers out
into the floor. He looked in the bathroom. Moss's H&K machinepistol was lying on the sink.
He left it there. He wiped his feet back and forth on the carpet to get the blood off the soles of
his boots and he stood looking at the room. Then his eye fell on the airduct.
He took the lamp from beside the bed and jerked the cord free and climbed up onto the
dresser and stove in the grate with the metal lampbase and pulled it loose and looked in. He
could see the dragmarks in the dust. He climbed down and stood there. He'd got blood and
matter on his shirt from off the wall and he took the shirt off and went back into the bathroom
and washed himself and dried with one of the bath-towels. Then he wet the towel and wiped
off his boots and folded the towel again and wiped down the legs of his jeans. He picked up
the shotgun and came back into the room naked to the waist, the shirt balled in one hand. He
wiped his bootsoles on the carpet again and looked around the room a last time and left.
When Bell walked into the office Torbert looked up from his desk and then rose and came
over and laid a paper down in front of him.
Is this it? Bell said.
Yessir.
Bell leaned back in his chair to read, tapping his lower lip slowly with his forefinger. After a
while he put the report down. He didnt look at Torbert. I know what's happened here, he said.
All right.
Have you ever been to a slaughterhouse?
Yessir. I believe so.
You'd know it if you had.
I think I went once when I was a kid.
Funny place to take a kid.
I think I went my own self. Snuck in.
How did they kill the beef?
They had a knocker straddled the chute and they'd let the beeves through one at a time and
he'd knock em in the head with a maul. He done that all day.
That sounds about right. They dont do it thataway no more. They use a airpowered gun that
shoots a steel bolt out of it. Just shoots it out about so far. They put that thing between the
beef's eyes and pull the trigger and down she goes. It's that quick.
Torbert was standing at the corner of Bell's desk. He waited a minute for the sheriff to
continue but the sheriff didnt continue. Torbert stood there. Then he looked away. I wish you
hadnt of even told me, he said.
I know, said Bell. I knowed what you'd say fore you said it.
Moss pulled into Eagle Pass at a quarter till two in the morning. He'd slept a good part of the
way in the back of the cab and he only woke when they slowed coming off the highway and
down Main Street. He watched the pale white globes of the streetlamps pass along the upper
rim of the window. Then he sat up.
You goin across the river? the driver said.
No. Just take me downtown.
You are downtown.
Moss leaned forward with his elbows on the back of the seat.
What's that right there.
That's the Maverick County Courthouse.
No. Right there where the sign is.
That's the Hotel Eagle.
Drop me there.
He paid the driver the fifty dollars they'd agreed on and picked up his bags off the curb and
walked up the steps to the porch and went in. The clerk was standing at the desk as if he'd
been expecting him.
He paid and put the key in his pocket and climbed the stairs and walked down the old hotel
corridor. Dead quiet. No lights in the transoms. He found the room and put the key in the door
and opened it and went in and shut the door behind him. Light from the streetlamps coming
through the lace curtains at the window. He set the bags on the bed and went back to the door
and switched on the overhead light. Old fashioned pushbutton switchplate. Oak furniture from
the turn of the century. Brown walls. Same chenille bedspread.
He sat on the bed thinking things over. He got up and looked out the window at the parking
lot and he went into the bathroom and got a glass of water and came back and sat on the bed
again. He took a sip and set the water on the glass top of the wooden bedside table. There is
no goddamn way, he said.
He undid the brass latch and the buckles on the case and began to take the packets of money
out and to stack them on the bed. When the case was empty he checked it for a false bottom
and he checked the back and sides and then he set it aside and began to go through the stacks
of bills, riffling each of the packets and stacking them back in the case. He'd packed it about a
third full before he found the sending unit.
The middle of the packet had been filled in with dollar bills with the centers cut out and the
transponder unit nested there was about the size of a Zippo lighter. He slid back the tape and
took it out and weighed it in his hand. Then he put it in the drawer and got up and took the
cut-out dollar bills and the banktape to the bathroom and flushed them down the toilet and
came back. He folded the loose hundreds and put them in his pocket and then packed the rest
of the banknotes into the case again and set the case in the chair and sat there looking at it. He
thought about a lot of things but the thing that stayed with him was that at some point he was
going to have to quit running on luck.
He got the shotgun out of the bag and laid it on the bed and turned on the bedside lamp. He
went to the door and turned off the overhead light and came back and stretched out on the bed
and stared at the ceiling. He knew what was coming. He just didnt know when. He got up and
went into the bathroom and pulled the chain on the light over the sink and looked at himself in
the mirror. He took a washcloth from the glass towelbar and turned on the hot water and wet
the cloth and wrung it out and wiped his face and the back of his neck. He took a leak and
then switched off the light and went back and sat on the bed. It had already occurred to him
that he would probably never be safe again in his life and he wondered if that was something
that you got used to. And if you did?
He emptied out the bag and put the shotgun in and zipped it shut and took it together with the
satchel down to the desk. The Mexican who'd checked him in was gone and in his place was
another clerk, thin and gray. A thin white shirt and a black bow tie. He was smoking a
cigarette and reading Ring magazine and he looked up at Moss with no great enthusiasm,
squinting in the smoke. Yessir, he said.
Did you just come on?
Yessir. Be here till ten in the mornin.
Moss laid a hundred dollar bill on the counter. The clerk put down the magazine.
I aint askin you to do nothin illegal, Moss said.
I'm just waitin to hear your description of that, the clerk said.
There's somebody lookin for me. All I'm askin you to do is to call me if anybody checks in.
By anybody I mean any swingin dick. Can you do that?
The nightclerk took the cigarette out of his mouth and held it over a small glass ashtray and
tipped the ash from the end of it with his little finger and looked at Moss. Yessir, he said. I
can do that.
Moss nodded and went back upstairs.
The phone never rang. Something woke him. He sat up and looked at the clock on the table.
Four thirty-seven. He swung his legs over the side of the bed and reached and got his boots
and pulled them on and sat listening.
He went over and stood with his ear to the door, the shotgun in one hand. He went in the
bathroom and pulled back the plastic showercurtain where it hung on rings over the tub and
turned on the tap and pulled the plunger to start the shower. Then he pulled the curtain back
around the tub and went out and closed the bathroom door behind him.
He stood at the door listening again. He dragged out the nylon bag from where he'd pushed it
under the bed and set it in the chair in the corner. He went over and switched on the light at
the bedside table and stood there trying to think. He realized that the phone might ring and he
took the receiver from the cradle and laid it on the table. He pulled back the covers and
rumpled the pillows on the bed. He looked at the clock. Four forty-three. He looked at the
phone lying there on the table. He picked it up and pulled the cord out of it and put it back in
the cradle. Then he went over and stood at the door, his thumb on the hammer of the shotgun.
He dropped to his stomach and put his ear to the space under the door. A cool wind. As if a
door had opened somewhere. What have you done. What have you failed to do.
He went to the far side of the bed and dropped down and pushed himself underneath it and lay
there on his stomach with the shotgun pointed at the door. Just space enough beneath the
wooden slats. Heart pumping against the dusty carpet. He waited. Two columns of dark
intersected the bar of light beneath the door and stood there. The next thing he heard was the
key in the lock. Very softly. Then the door opened. He could see out into the hallway. There
was no one there. He waited. He tried not even to blink but he did. Then there was an
expensive pair of ostrichskin boots standing in the doorway. Pressed jeans. The man stood
there. Then he came in. Then he crossed slowly to the bathroom.
At that moment Moss realized that he was not going to open the bathroom door. He was going
to turn around. And when he did it would be too late. Too late to make any more mistakes or
to do anything at all and that he was going to die. Do it, he said. Just do it.
Dont turn around, he said. You turn around and I'll blow you to hell.
The man didnt move. Moss was walking forward on his elbows holding the shotgun. He could
see no higher than the man's waist and he didnt know what kind of gun he was carrying. Drop
the gun, he said. Do it now.
A shotgun clattered to the floor. Moss pulled himself up. Get your hands up, he said. Step
back from the door.
He took two steps back and stood, his hands at shoulder level. Moss came around the end of
the bed. The man was no more than ten feet away. The whole room was pulsing slowly. There
was an odd smell in the air. Like some foreign cologne. A medicinal edge to it. Everything
humming. Moss held the shotgun at his waist with the hammer cocked. There was nothing
that could happen that would have surprised him. He felt as if he weighed nothing. He felt as
if he were floating. The man didnt even look at him. He seemed oddly untroubled. As if this
were all part of his day.
Back up. Some more.
He did. Moss picked up the man's shotgun and threw it onto the bed. He switched on the
overhead light and shut the door. Look over here, he said.
The man turned his head and gazed at Moss. Blue eyes. Serene. Dark hair. Something about
him faintly exotic. Beyond Moss's experience.
What do you want?
He didnt answer.
Moss crossed the room and took hold of the footpost of the bed and swung the bed sideways
with one hand. The document case stood there in the dust. He picked it up. The man didnt
even seem to notice. His thoughts seemed elsewhere.
He took the nylon bag from the chair and slung it over his shoulder and he got the shotgun
with its huge canlike silencer off the bed and put it under his arm and picked up the case
again. Let's go, he said. The man lowered his hands and walked out into the hallway.
The small box that held the transponder receiver was standing in the floor just outside the
door. Moss left it there. He had the feeling he'd already taken more chances than he had
coming. He backed down the hallway with his shotgun trained on the man's belt, holding it in
one hand like a pistol. He started to tell him to put his hands back up but something told him
that it didnt really make any difference where the man's hands were. The bedroom door was
still open, the shower still running.
You show your face at the head of these stairs and I'll shoot you.
The man didnt answer. He could have been a mute for all that Moss knew.
Right there, Moss said. Dont you take another step.
He stopped. Moss backed to the stairs and took one last look at him standing there in the dull
yellow light from the wallsconce and then he turned and doubled down the stairwell taking
the steps two at a time. He didnt know where he was going. He hadnt thought that far ahead.
In the lobby the nightclerk's feet were sticking out from behind the desk. Moss didnt stop. He
pushed out through the front door and down the steps. By the time he'd crossed the street
Chigurh was already on the balcony of the hotel above him. Moss felt something tug at the
bag on his shoulder. The pistolshot was just a muffled pop, flat and small in the dark quiet of
the town. He turned in time to see the muzzleflash of the second shot faint but visible under
the pink glow of the fifteen foot high neon hotel sign. He didnt feel anything. The bullet
snapped at his shirt and blood started running down his upper arm and he was already at a
dead run. With the next shot he felt a stinging pain in his side. He fell down and got up again
leaving Chigurh's shotgun lying in the street. Damn, he said. What a shot.
He loped wincing down the sidewalk past the Aztec Theatre. As he passed the little round
ticket kiosk all the glass fell out of it. He never even heard that shot. He spun with the shotgun
and thumbed back the hammer and fired. The buckshot rattled off the second storey
balustrade and took the glass out of some of the windows. When he turned again a car coming
down Main Street picked him up in the lights and slowed and then speeded up again. He
turned up Adams Street and the car skidded sideways through the intersection in a cloud of
rubbersmoke and stopped. The engine had died and the driver was trying to start it. Moss
turned with his back to the brick wall of the building. Two men had come from the car and
were crossing the street on foot at a run. One of them opened fire with a small caliber
machinegun and he fired at them twice with the shotgun and then loped on with the warm
blood seeping into his crotch. In the street he heard the car start up again.
By the time he got to Grande Street a pandemonium of gunfire had broken out behind him. He
didnt think he could run any more. He saw himself limping along in a storewindow across the
street, holding his elbow to his side, the bag slung over his shoulder and carrying the shotgun
and the leather document case, dark in the glass and wholly unaccountable. When he looked
again he was sitting on the sidewalk. Get up you son of a bitch, he said. Dont you set there
and die. You get the hell up.
He crossed Ryan Street with blood sloshing in his boots. He pulled the bag around and
unzipped it and shoved the shotgun in and zipped it shut again. He stood tottering. Then he
crossed to the bridge. He was cold and shivering and he thought he was going to vomit.
There was a changewindow and a turnstile on the American side of the bridge and he put a
dime in the slot and pushed through and staggered out onto the span and eyed the narrow walk
ahead of him. Just breaking first light. Dull and gray above the floodplain along the east shore
of the river. God's own distance to the far side.
Half way he met a party returning. Four of them, young boys, maybe eighteen, partly drunk.
He set the case on the sidewalk and took a pack of the hundreds from his pocket. The money
was slick with blood. He wiped it on his trouser-leg and peeled off five of the bills and put the
rest in his back pocket.
Excuse me, he said. Leaning against the chainlink fence. His bloody footprints on the walk
behind him like clues in an arcade.
Excuse me.
They were stepping off the curb into the roadway to go around him.
Excuse me I wondered if you all would sell me a coat.
They didnt stop till they were past him. Then one of them turned. What'll you give? he said.
That man behind you. The one in the long coat.
The one in the long coat stopped with the others.
How much?
I'll give you five hundred dollars.
Bullshit.
Come on Brian.
Let's go, Brian. He's drunk.
Brian looked at them and he looked at Moss. Let's see the money, he said.
It's right here.
Let me see it.
Let me hold the coat.
Let's go, Brian.
You take this hundred and let me hold the coat. Then I'll give you the rest.
All right.
He slipped out of the coat and handed it over and Moss handed him the bill.
What's this on it?
Blood.
Blood?
Blood.
He stood holding the bill in one hand. He looked at the blood on his fingers. What happened
to you?
I've been shot.
Let's go, Brian. Goddamn.
Let me have the money.
Moss handed him the bills and unshouldered the zipper bag to the sidewalk and struggled into
the coat. The boy folded the bills and put them in his pocket and stepped away.
He joined the others and they went on. Then they stopped. They were talking together and
looking back at him. He got the coat buttoned and put his money in the inside pocket and
shouldered the bag and picked up the leather case. You all need to keep walkin, he said. I
wont tell you twice.
They turned and went on. There were only three of them. He shoved at his eyes with the heel
of his hand. He tried to see where the fourth one had gone. Then he realized that there was no
fourth one. That's all right, he said. Just keep puttin one foot in front of the other.
When he reached the place where the river actually passed beneath the bridge he stopped and
stood looking down at it. The Mexican gateshack was just ahead. He looked back down the
bridge but the three were gone. A grainy light to the east. Over the low black hills beyond the
town. The water moved beneath him slow and dark. A dog somewhere. Silence. Nothing.
There was a stand of tall carrizo cane growing along the American side of the river below him
and he set the zipper bag down and took hold of the case by the handles and swung it behind
him and then heaved it over the rail and out into space.
Whitehot pain. He held his side and watched the bag turn slowly in the diminishing light from
the bridgelamps and drop soundlessly into the cane and vanish. Then he slid to the pavement
and sat there in the puddling blood, his face against the wire. Get up, he said. Damn you, get
up.
When he reached the gatehouse there was no one there. He pushed through and into the town
of Piedras Negras, State of Coahuila.
He made his way up the street to a small park or zocalo where the grackles in the eucalyptus
trees were waking and calling. The trees were painted white to the height of a wainscot and
from a distance the park seemed set with white posts arrayed at random. In the center a
wrought-iron gazebo or bandstand. He collapsed on one of the iron benches with the bag on
the bench beside him and leaned forward holding himself. Globes of orange light hung from
the lampstands. The world receding. Across from the park was a church. It seemed far away.
The grackles creaked and swayed in the branches overhead and day was coming.
He put out one hand on the bench beside him. Nausea. Dont lie down.
No sun. Just the gray light breaking. The streets wet. The shops closed. Iron shutters. An old
man was coming along pushing a broom. He paused. Then he moved on.
Seor, Moss said.
Bueno, the old man said.
You speak english?
He studied Moss, holding the broom handle in both hands. He shrugged his shoulders.
I need a doctor.
The old man waited for more. Moss pushed himself up. The bench was bloody. I've been shot,
he said.
The old man looked him over. He clucked his tongue. He looked away toward the dawn. The
trees and buildings taking shape. He looked at Moss and gestured with his chin. Puede andar?
he said.
What?
Puede caminar? He made walking motions with his fingers, his hand hanging loosely at the
wrist.
Moss nodded. A wave of blackness came over him. He waited till it passed.
Tiene dinero? The sweeper rubbed his thumb and fingers together.
Si, Moss said. Si. He rose and stood swaying. He took the packet of bloodsoaked bills from
the overcoat pocket and separated a hundred dollar note and handed it to the old man. The old
man took it with great reverence. He looked at Moss and then he stood the broom against the
bench.
When Chigurh came down the steps and out the front door of the hotel he had a towel
wrapped around his upper right leg and tied with sections of window blind cord. The towel
was already wet through with blood. He was carrying a small bag in one hand and a pistol in
the other.
The Cadillac was crossways in the intersection and there was gunfire in the street. He stepped
back into the doorway of the barbershop. The clatter of automatic riflefire and the deep heavy
slam of a shotgun rattling off the facades of the buildings. The men in the street were dressed
in raincoats and tennis shoes. They didnt look like anybody you would expect to meet in this
part of the country. He limped back up the steps to the porch and laid the pistol over the
balustrade and opened fire on them.
By the time they'd figured out where the fire was coming from he'd killed one and wounded
another. The wounded man got behind the car and opened up on the hotel. Chigurh stood with
his back to the brick wall and fitted a fresh clip into the pistol. The rounds were taking out the
glass in the doors and splintering up the sashwork. The foyer light went out. It was still dark
enough in the street that you could see the muzzleflashes. There was a break in the firing and
Chigurh turned and pushed his way through into the hotel lobby, the bits of glass crackling
under his boots. He went gimping down the hallway and down the steps at the rear of the
hotel and out into the parking lot.
He crossed the street and went up Jefferson keeping to the north wall of the buildings, trying
to hurry and swinging the bound leg out at his side. All of this was one block from the
Maverick County Courthouse and he figured he had minutes at best before fresh parties began
to arrive.
When he got to the corner there was only one man standing in the street. He was at the rear of
the car and the car was badly shot up, all of the glass gone or shot white. There was at least
one body inside. The man was watching the hotel and Chigurh leveled the pistol and shot him
twice and he fell down in the street. Chigurh stepped back behind the corner of the building
and stood with the pistol upright at his shoulder, waiting. A rich tang of gunpowder on the
cool morning air. Like the smell of fireworks. No sound anywhere.
When he limped out into the street one of the men he'd shot from the hotel porch was
crawling toward the curb. Chigurh watched him. Then he shot him in the back. The other one
was lying by the front fender of the car. He'd been shot through the head and the dark blood
was pooled all about him. His weapon was lying there but Chigurh paid it no mind. He
walked to the rear of the car and jostled the man there with his boot and then bent and picked
up the machine-gun he'd been firing. It was a shortbarreled Uzi with the twenty-five round
clip. Chigurh rifled the dead man's raincoat pockets and came up with three more clips, one of
them full. He put them in the pocket of his jacket and stuck the pistol down in the front of his
belt and checked the rounds in the clip that was in the Uzi. Then he slung the piece over his
shoulder and hobbled back to the curb. The man he'd shot in the back was lying there
watching him. Chigurh looked up the street toward the hotel and the courthouse. The tall palm
trees. He looked at the man. The man was lying in a spreading pool of blood. Help me, he
said. Chigurh took the pistol from his waist. He looked into the man's eyes. The man looked
away.
Look at me, Chigurh said.
The man looked and looked away again.
Do you speak english?
Yes.
Dont look away. I want you to look at me.
He looked at Chigurh. He looked at the new day paling all about. Chigurh shot him through
the forehead and then stood watching. Watching the capillaries break up in his eyes. The light
receding. Watching his own image degrade in that squandered world. He shoved the pistol in
his belt and looked back up the street once more. Then he picked up the bag and slung the Uzi
over his shoulder and crossed the street and went limping on toward the hotel parking lot
where he'd left his vehicle.
V
WE COME HERE FROM Georgia. Our family did. Horse and wagon. I pretty much know
that for a fact. I know they's a lots of things in a family history that just plain aint so. Any
family. The stories gets passed on and the truth gets passed over. As the sayin goes. Which I
reckon some would take as meanin that the truth cant compete. But I dont believe that. I think
that when the lies are all told and forgot the truth will be there yet. It dont move about from
place to place and it dont change from time to time. You cant corrupt it any more than you
can salt salt. You cant corrupt it because that's what it is. It's the thing you're talkin about.
I've heard it compared to the rock  maybe in the bibleand I wouldnt disagree with that.
But it'll be here even when the rock is gone. I'm sure they's people would disagree with that.
Quite a few, in fact. But I never could find out what any of them did believe.
You always tried to be available for your social events and I would always go to things like
cemetery cleanins of course. That was all right. The women would fix dinner on the ground
and of course it was a way of campaignin but you were doin somethin for folks that couldnt
do it for theirselves. Well, you could be cynical about it I reckon and say that you just didnt
want em comin around at night. But I think it goes deeper than that. It is community and it is
respect, of course, but the dead have more claims on you than what you might want to admit
or even what you might know about and them claims can be very strong indeed. Very strong
indeed. You get the feelin they just dont want to turn loose. So any little thing helps, in that
respect.
What I was sayin the other day about the papers. Here last week they found this couple out in
California they would rent out rooms to old people and then kill em and bury em in the yard
and cash their social security checks. They'd torture em first, I dont know why. Maybe their
television was broke. Now here's what the papers had to say about that. I quote from the
papers. Said: Neighbors were alerted when a man run from the premises wearin only a
dogcollar. You cant make up such a thing as that. I dare you to even try.
But that's what it took, you'll notice. All that hollerin and diggin in the yard didnt bring it.
That's all right. I laughed myself when I read it. There aint a whole lot else you can do.
IT WAS ALMOST A three hour drive to Odessa and dark when he got there. He listened to
the truckers on the radio. Has he got jurisdiction up here? Come on. Hell if I know. I think if
he sees you committin a crime he does. Well I'm a reformed criminal then. You got that right
old buddy.
He got a city map at the quickstop and spread it out on the seat of the cruiser while he drank
coffee out of a styrofoam cup. He traced his route on the map with a yellow marker from the
glovebox and refolded the map and laid it on the seat beside him and switched off the
domelight and started the engine.
When he knocked at the door Llewelyn's wife answered it. As she opened the door he took off
his hat and he was right away sorry he'd done it. She put her hand to her mouth and reached
for the doorjamb.
I'm sorry mam, he said. He's all right. Your husband is all right. I just wanted to talk to you if
I could.
You aint lyin to me are you?
No mam. I dont lie.
You drove up here from Sanderson?
Yes mam.
What did you want.
I just wanted to visit with you a little bit. Talk to you about your husband.
Well you cant come in here. You'll scare Mama to death. Let me get my coat.
Yes mam.
They drove down to the Sunshine Cafe and sat in a booth at the rear and ordered coffee.
You dont know where he's at, do you.
No I dont. I done told you.
I know you did.
He took off his hat and laid it in the booth beside him and ran his hand through his hair. You
aint heard from him?
No I aint.
Nothin.
Not word one.
The waitress brought the coffee in two heavy white china mugs. Bell stirred his with his
spoon. He raised the spoon and looked into the smoking silver bowl of it. How much money
did he give you?
She didnt answer. Bell smiled. What did you start to say? he said. You can say it.
I started to say that's some more of your business, aint it.
Why dont you just pretend I aint the sheriff.
And pretend you're what?
You know he's in trouble.
Llewelyn aint done nothin.
It's not me he's in trouble with.
Who's he in trouble with then?
Some pretty bad people.
Llewelyn can take care of hisself.
Do you care if I call you Carla?
I go by Carla Jean.
Carla Jean. Is that all right?
That's all right. You dont care if I keep on callin you Sheriff do you?
Bell smiled. No, he said. That's fine.
All right.
These people will kill him, Carla Jean. They wont quit.
He wont neither. He never has.
Bell nodded. He sipped his coffee. The face that lapped and shifted in the dark liquid in the
cup seemed an omen of things to come. Things losing shape. Taking you with them. He set
the cup down and looked at the girl. I wish I could say that was in his favor. But I have to say
I dont think it is.
Well, she said, he's who he is and he always will be. That's why I married him.
But you aint heard from him in a while.
I didnt expect to hear from him.
Were you all havin problems?
We dont have problems. When we have problems we fix em.
Well, you're lucky people.
Yes we are.
She watched him. How come you to ask me that, she said.
About havin problems?
About havin problems.
I just wondered if you were.
Has somethin happened that you know about and I dont?
No. I could ask you the same thing.
Except I wouldnt tell you.
Yes.
You think he's left me, dont you.
I dont know. Has he?
No. He aint. I know him.
You used to know him.
I know him yet. He aint changed.
Maybe.
But you dont believe that.
Well, I guess in all honesty I would have to say that I never knew nor did I ever hear of
anybody that money didnt change. I'd have to say he'd be the first.
Well he'll be the first then.
I hope that's true.
Do you really hope that, Sheriff?
Yes. I do.
He aint been charged with nothin?
No. He aint been charged with nothin.
That dont mean he wont be.
No. It dont. If he lives that long.
Well. He aint dead yet.
I hope that's more comfort to you than it is to me.
He sipped the coffee and set the mug down on the table. He watched her. He needs to turn the
money in, he said. They'd put it in the papers. Then maybe these people would leave him
alone. I cant guarantee that they will. But they might. It's the only chance he's got.
You could put it in the papers anyway.
Bell studied her. No, he said. I couldnt.
Or wouldnt.
Wouldnt then. How much money is it?
I dont know what you're talkin about.
All right.
You care if I smoke? she said.
I think we're still in America.
She got her cigarettes out and lit one and turned her face and blew the smoke out into the
room. Bell watched her. How do you think this is goin to end? he said.
I dont know. I dont know how nothin is goin to end. Do you?
I know how it aint.
Like livin happily ever after?
Somethin like that.
Llewelyn's awful smart.
Bell nodded. You ought to be more worried about him I guess is what I'm sayin.
She took a long pull on the cigarette. She studied Bell. Sheriff, she said, I think I'm probably
just about as worried as I need to be.
He's goin to wind up killin somebody. Have you thought about that?
He never has.
He was in Vietnam.
I mean as a civilian.
He will.
She didnt answer.
You want some more coffee?
I'm coffeed out. I didnt want none to start with.
She looked off across the cafe. The empty tables. The night cashier was a boy about eighteen
and he was bent over the glass counter reading a magazine. My mama's got cancer, she said.
She aint got all that long to live.
I'm sorry to hear that.
I call her mama. She's really my grandmother. She raised me and I was lucky to have her.
Well. Lucky dont even say it.
Yes mam.
She never did much like Llewelyn. I dont know why. No reason in particular. He was always
good to her. I thought after she got diagnosed she'd be easier to live with but she aint. She's
got worse.
How come you live with her?
I dont live with her. I aint that ignorant. This is just temporary.
Bell nodded.
I need to get back, she said.
All right. Have you got a gun?
Yeah. I got a gun. I guess you think I'm just bait settin up here.
I dont know.
But that's what you think.
I cant believe it's all that good a situation.
Yeah.
I just hope you'll talk to him.
I need to think about it.
All right.
I'd die and live in hell forever fore I'd turn snitch on Llewelyn. I hope you understand that.
I do understand that.
I never did learn no shortcuts about things such as that. I hope I never do.
Yes mam.
I'll tell you somethin if you want to hear it.
I want to hear it.
You might think I'm peculiar.
I might.
Or you might think it anyway.
No I dont.
When I got out of high school I was still sixteen and I got a job at Wal-Mart. I didnt know
what else to do. We needed the money. What little it was. Anyway, the night before I went
down there I had this dream. Or it was like a dream. I think I was still about half awake. But it
come to me in this dream or whatever it was that if I went down there that he would find me.
At the Wal-Mart. I didnt know who he was or what his name was or what he looked like. I
just knew that I'd know him when I seen him. I kept a calendar and marked the days. Like
when you're in jail. I mean I aint never been in jail, but like you would probably. And on the
ninety-ninth day he walked in and he asked me where sportin goods was at and it was him.
And I told him where it was at and he looked at me and went on. And directly he come back
and he read my nametag and he said my name and he looked at me and he said: What time do
you get off? And that was all she wrote. There was not no question in my mind. Not then, not
now, not ever.
That's a nice story, Bell said. I hope it has a nice endin.
It happened just like that.
I know it did. I appreciate you talkin to me. I guess I'd better cut you loose, late as it is.
She stubbed out her cigarette. Well, she said. I'm sorry you come all this way not to do no
better than what you done.
Bell picked up his hat and put it on and squared it. Well, he said. You do the best you can.
Sometimes things turns out all right.
Do you really care?
About your husband?
About my husband. Yes.
Yes mam. I do. The people of Terrell County hired me to look after em. That's my job. I get
paid to be the first one hurt. Killed, for that matter. I'd better care.
You're askin me to believe what you say. But you're the one sayin it.
Bell smiled. Yes mam, he said. I'm the one sayin it. I just hope you'll think about what I did
say. I aint makin up a word about the kind of trouble he's in. If he gets killed then I got to live
with that. But I can do it. I just want you to think about if you can.
All right.
Can I ask you somethin?
You can ask.
I know you aint supposed to ask a woman her age but I couldnt help but be a bit curious.
That's all right. I'm nineteen. I look younger.
How long have you all been married?
Three years. Almost three years.
Bell nodded. My wife was eighteen when we married. Just had turned. Marryin her makes up
for ever dumb thing I ever done. I even think I still got a few left in the account. I think I'm
way in the black on that. Are you ready?
She got her purse and rose. Bell picked up the check and squared his hat again and eased up
from the booth. She put her cigarettes in her purse and looked at him. I'll tell you somethin,
Sheriff. Nineteen is old enough to know that if you have got somethin that means the world to
you it's all that more likely it'll get took away. Sixteen was, for that matter. I think about that.
Bell nodded. I aint a stranger to them thoughts, Carla Jean. Them thoughts is very familiar to
me.
He was asleep in his bed and it still mostly dark out when the phone rang. He looked at the
old radium dial clock on the night table and reached and picked up the phone. Sheriff Bell, he
said.
He listened for about two minutes. Then he said: I appreciate you callin me. Yep. It's just out
and out war is what it is. I dont know no other name for it.
He pulled up in front of the sheriff's office in Eagle Pass at nine-fifteen in the morning and he
and the sheriff sat in the office and drank coffee and looked at the photos taken in the street
two blocks away three hours earlier.
There's days I'm in favor of givin the whole damn place back to em, the sheriff said.
I hear you, said Bell.
Dead bodies in the street. Citizens' businesses all shot up. People's cars. Whoever heard of
such a thing?
Can we go over and take a look?
Yeah. We can go over.
The street was still roped off but there wasnt much to see. The front of the Eagle Hotel was all
shot up and there was broken glass in the sidewalk down both sides of the street. Tires and
glass shot out of the cars and holes in the sheet-metal with the little rings of bare steel around
them. The Cadillac had been towed off and the glass in the street swept up and the blood
hosed away.
Who was it in the hotel do you reckon?
Some Mexican dopedealer.
The sheriff stood smoking. Bell walked off a ways down the street. He stood. He came back
up the sidewalk, his boots grinding in the glass. The sheriff flipped his cigarette into the street.
You go up Adams there about a half a block you'll see a blood trail.
Goin yon way, I reckon.
If he had any sense. I think them boys in the car got caught in a crossfire. It looks to me like
they was shootin towards the hotel and up the street yonder both.
What do you reckon their car was doin in the middle of the intersection thataway?
I got no idea, Ed Tom.
They walked up to the hotel.
What kind of shellcasins did you all pick up?
Mostly nine millimeter with some shotgun hulls and a few .380's. We got a shotgun and two
machineguns.
Fully automatic?
Sure. Why not?
Why not.
They walked up the stairs. The porch of the hotel was covered in glass and the woodwork shot
up.
The nightclerk got killed. About as bad a piece of luck as you could have, I reckon. Caught a
stray round.
Where'd he catch it?
Right between the eyes.
They walked into the lobby and stood. Somebody had thrown a couple of towels over the
blood in the carpet behind the desk but the blood had soaked through the towels. He wasnt
shot, Bell said.
Who wasnt shot.
The nightclerk.
He wasnt shot?
No sir.
What makes you say that?
You get the lab report and you'll see.
What are you sayin Ed Tom? That they drilled his brains out with a Black and Decker?
That's pretty close. I'll let you think about it.
Driving back to Sanderson it began to snow. He went to the courthouse and did some
paperwork and left just before dark. When he pulled up in the driveway behind the house his
wife was looking out from the kitchen window. She smiled at him. The falling snow drifted
and turned in the warm yellow light.
They sat in the little diningroom and ate. She'd put on music, a violin concerto. The phone
didnt ring.
Did you take it off the hook?
No, she said.
Wires must be down.
She smiled. I think it's just the snow. I think it makes people stop and think.
Bell nodded. I hope it comes a blizzard then.
Do you remember the last time it snowed here?
No, I cant say as I do. Do you?
Yes I do.
When was it.
It'll come to you.
Oh.
She smiled. They ate.
That's nice, Bell said.
What is?
The music. Supper. Bein home.
Do you think she was tellin the truth?
I do. Yes.
Do you think that boy is still alive?
I dont know. I hope he is.
You may never hear another word about any of this.
It's possible. That wouldnt be the end of it though, would it?
No, I guess it wouldnt.
You cant count on em to kill one another off like this on a regular basis. But I expect some
cartel will take it over sooner or later and they'll wind up just dealin with the Mexican
Government. There's too much money in it. They'll freeze out these country boys. It wont be
long, neither.
How much money do you think he has?
The Moss boy?
Yes.
Hard to say. Could be in the millions. Well, not too many millions. He carried it out of there
on foot.
Did you want some coffee?
Yes I would.
She rose and went to the sideboard and unplugged the percolator and brought it to the table
and poured his cup and sat down again. Just dont come home dead some evenin, she said. I
wont put up with it.
I better not do it then.
Do you think he'll send for her?
Bell stirred his coffee. He sat holding the steaming spoon above the cup, then he laid it in the
saucer. I dont know, he said. I know he'd be a damn fool if he didnt.
THE OFFICE WAS ON the seventeenth floor with a view over the skyline of Houston and
the open lowlands to the ship channel and the bayou beyond. Colonies of silver tanks. Gas
flares, pale in the day. When Wells showed up the man told him to come in and told him to
shut the door. He didnt even turn around. He could see Wells in the glass. Wells shut the door
and stood with his hands crossed before him at the wrist. The way a funeral director might
stand.
The man finally turned and looked at him. You know Anton Chigurh by sight, is that correct?
Yessir, that's correct.
When did you last see him?
November twenty-eighth of last year.
How do you happen to remember the date?
I dont happen to remember it. I remember dates. Numbers.
The man nodded. He was standing behind his desk. The desk was of polished stainless steel
and walnut and there wasnt anything on it. Not a picture or a piece of paper. Nothing.
We got a loose cannon here. And we're missing product and we're out a bunch of money.
Yessir. I understand that.
You understand that.
Yessir.
That's good. I'm glad I've got your attention.
Yessir. You have my attention.
The man unlocked a drawer in the desk and took out a steel box and unlocked that and took
out a card and closed the box and locked it and put it away again. He held up the card between
two fingers and looked at Wells and Wells stepped forward and took it.
You pay your own expenses if I remember correctly.
Yessir.
This account will only give up twelve hundred dollars in any twenty-four hour period. That's
up from a thousand.
Yessir.
How well do you know Chigurh.
Well enough.
That's not an answer.
What do you want to know?
The man tapped his knuckles on the desk. He looked up. I'd just like to know your opinion of
him. In general. The invincible Mr Chigurh.
Nobody's invincible.
Somebody is.
Why do you say that?
Somewhere in the world is the most invincible man. Just as somewhere is the most
vulnerable.
That's a belief that you have?
No. It's called statistics. Just how dangerous is he?
Wells shrugged. Compared to what? The bubonic plague? He's bad enough that you called
me. He's a psychopathic killer but so what? There's plenty of them around.
He was in a shoot-out at Eagle Pass yesterday.
A shoot-out?
A shoot-out. People dead in the streets. You dont read the papers.
No sir, I dont.
He studied Wells. You've led something of a charmed life, havent you Mr Wells?
In all honesty I cant say that charm has had a whole lot to do with it.
Yes, the man said. What else.
I guess that's it. Were these Pablo's men?
Yes.
You're sure.
Not in the sense that you mean. But reasonably sure. They werent ours. He killed two other
men a couple of days before and those two did happen to be ours. Along with the three at that
colossal goatfuck a few days before that. All right?
All right. I guess that will do it.
Good hunting, as we used to say. Once upon a time. In the long ago.
Thank you sir. Can I ask you something?
Sure.
I couldnt come back up in that elevator, could I?
Not to this floor. Why?
I was just interested. Security. Always interesting.
It recodes itself after every trip. A randomly generated five digit number. It doesnt print out
anywhere. I dial a number and it reads the code back over the phone. I give it to you and you
punch it in. Does that answer your question?
Nice.
Yes.
I counted the floors from the street.
And?
There's a floor missing.
I'll have to look into it.
Wells smiled.
You can see yourself out? the man said.
Yes.
All right.
One other thing.
What is that.
I wondered if I could get my parking ticket validated.
The man cocked his head slightly. This is an attempt at humor I suppose.
Sorry.
Good day, Mr Wells.
Right.
When Wells got to the hotel the plastic ribbons were gone and the glass and wood had been
swept up out of the lobby and the place was open for business. There was plywood nailed
over the doors and two of the windows and there was a new clerk standing at the desk where
the old clerk had been. Yessir, he said.
I need a room, Wells said.
Yessir. Is it just yourself?
Yes.
And for how many nights would that be.
Probably just the one.
The clerk pushed the pad toward Wells and turned to study the keys hanging on the board.
Wells filled out the form. I know you're tired of people asking, he said, but what happened to
your hotel?
I'm not supposed to discuss it.
That's all right.
The clerk laid the key on the desk. Will that be cash or credit card?
Cash. How much is it?
Fourteen plus tax.
How much is it. Altogether.
Sir?
I said how much is it altogether. You need to tell me how much it is. Give me a figure. All in.
Yessir. That would be fourteen-seventy.
Were you here when all this took place?
No sir. I only started here yesterday. This is just my second shift.
Then what is it you're not supposed to discuss?
Sir?
What time do you get off?
Sir?
Let me rephrase that. What time is your shift over.
The clerk was tall and thin, maybe Mexican and maybe not. His eyes darted briefly over the
lobby of the hotel. As if there might be something out there to help him. I just came on at six,
he said. The shift is over at two.
And who comes on at two.
I dont know his name. He was the dayclerk.
He wasnt here the night before last.
No sir. He was the dayclerk.
The man who was on duty the night before last. Where is he?
He's not with us anymore.
Have you got yesterday's paper here?
He backed away and looked under the desk. No sir, he said. I think they threw it out.
All right. Send me up a couple of whores and a fifth of whiskey with some ice.
Sir?
I'm just pulling your leg. You need to relax. They're not coming back. I can pretty near
guarantee it.
Yessir. I hope to hell not. I didnt even want to take this job.
Wells smiled and tapped the fiberboard keyfob twice on the marble desktop and went up the
stairs.
He was surprised to find the police tape still across both of the rooms. He went on to his own
room and set his bag in the chair and got out his shavingkit and went in the bathroom and
turned on the light. He brushed his teeth and washed his face and went back into the room and
stretched out on the bed. After a while he got up and went to the chair and turned the bag
sideways and unzipped a compartment in the bottom and took out a suede leather pistolcase.
He unzipped the case and took out a stainless steel .357 revolver and went back to the bed and
took off his boots and stretched out again with the pistol beside him.
When he woke it was almost dark. He rose and went to the window and pushed back the old
lace curtain. Lights in the street. Long reefs of dull red cloud racked over the darkening
western horizon. Roofs in a low and squalid skyline. He put the pistol in his belt and pulled
his shirt outside of his trousers to cover it and went out and down the hallway in his sockfeet.
It took him about fifteen seconds to get into Moss's room and he shut the door behind him
without disturbing the tape. He leaned against the door and smelled the room. Then he stood
there just looking things over.
The first thing he did was to walk carefully over the carpet. When he came across the
depression where the bed had been moved he swung the bed out into the room. He knelt and
blew at the dust and he studied the nap of the carpet. He rose and picked up the pillows and
smelled them and put them back. He left the bed standing quarterwise in the room and walked
over to the wardrobe and opened the doors and looked in and closed them again.
He went into the bathroom. He ran his forefinger around the sink. A washcloth and handtowel
had been used but not the soap. He ran his finger down the side of the tub and then wiped it
along the seam of his trousers. He sat on the edge of the tub and tapped his foot on the tiles.
The other room was number 227. He went in and closed the door and turned and stood. The
bed had not been slept in. The bathroom door was open. A bloody towel lay in the floor.
He walked over and pushed the door all the way back. There was a bloodstained washcloth in
the sink. The other towel was missing. Bloody handprints. A bloody handprint on the edge of
the showercurtain. I hope you havent crawled off in a hole somewhere, he said. I sure would
like to get paid.
He was abroad in the morning at first light walking the streets and making notes in his head.
The pavement had been hosed off but you could still see bloodstains in the concrete of the
walkway where Moss had been shot. He went back to Main Street and started again. Bits of
glass in the gutters and along the sidewalks. Some of it windowglass and some of it from
curbside automobiles. The windows that had been shot out were boarded up with plywood but
you could see the pocks in the brickwork or the teardrop smears of lead that had come down
from the hotel. He walked back to the hotel and sat on the steps and looked at the street. The
sun was coming up over the Aztec Theatre. Something caught his eye at the second floor
level. He got up and walked down and crossed the street and climbed the stairs. Two
bulletholes in the windowglass. He tapped at the door and waited. Then he opened the door
and went in.
A darkened room. Faint smell of rot. He stood until his eyes were accustomed to the dimness.
A parlor. A pianola or small organ against the far wall. A chifforobe. A rockingchair by the
window where an old woman sat slumped.
Wells stood over the woman studying her. She'd been shot through the forehead and had tilted
forward leaving part of the back of her skull and a good bit of dried brainmatter stuck to the
slat of the rocker behind her. She had a newspaper in her lap and she was wearing a cotton
robe that was black with dried blood. It was cold in the room. Wells looked around. A second
shot had marked a date on a calendar on the wall behind her that was three days hence. You
could not help but notice. He looked around the rest of the room. He took a small camera
from his jacket pocket and took a couple of pictures of the dead woman and put the camera
back in his pocket again. Not what you had in mind at all, was it darling? he told her.
Moss woke in a ward with sheeting hung between him and the bed to his left. A shadowshow
of figures there. Voices in Spanish. Dim noises from the street. A motorcycle. A dog. He
turned his face on the pillow and looked into the eyes of a man sitting on a metal chair against
the wall holding a bouquet of flowers. How are you feeling? the man said.
I've felt better. Who are you?
My name is Carson Wells.
Who are you?
I think you know who I am. I brought you some flowers.
Moss turned his head and lay staring at the ceiling. How many of you people are there?
Well, I'd say there's only one you've got to worry about right now.
You.
Yes.
What about that guy that come to the hotel.
We can talk about him.
Talk then.
I can make him go away.
I can do that myself.
I dont think so.
You're entitled to your opinions.
If Acosta's people hadnt shown up when they did I dont think you would have made out so
good.
I didnt make out so good.
Yes you did. You made out extremely well.
Moss turned his head and looked at the man again. How long have you been here?
About an hour.
Just settin there.
Yes.
You dont have much to do, do you?
I like to do one thing at a time, if that's what you mean.
You look dumbern hell settin there.
Wells smiled.
Why dont you put them damn flowers down.
All right.
He rose and laid the bouquet on the bedside table and sat back in the chair again.
Do you know what two centimeters is?
Yeah. It's a measurement.
It's about three quarters of an inch.
All right.
That's the distance that round missed your liver by.
Is that what the doctor told you?
Yes. You know what the liver does?
No.
It keeps you alive. Do you know who the man is who shot you?
Maybe he didnt shoot me. Maybe it was one of the Mexicans.
Do you know who the man is?
No. Am I supposed to?
Because he's not somebody you really want to know. The people he meets tend to have very
short futures. Nonexistent, in fact.
Well good for him.
You're not listening. You need to pay attention. This man wont stop looking for you. Even if
he gets the money back. It wont make any difference to him. Even if you went to him and
gave him the money he would still kill you. Just for having inconvenienced him.
I think I done a little more than inconvenience him.
How do you mean.
I think I hit him.
Why do you think that?
I sprayed double ought buckshot all over him. I cant believe it done him a whole lot of good.
Wells sat back in the chair. He studied Moss. You think you killed him?
I dont know.
Because you didnt. He came out into the street and killed every one of the Mexicans and then
went back into the hotel. Like you might go out and get a paper or something.
He didnt kill ever one of them.
He killed the ones that were left.
You tellin me he wasnt hit?
I dont know.
You mean why would you tell me.
If you like.
Is he a buddy of yours?
No.
I thought maybe he was a buddy of yours.
No you didnt. How do you know he's not on his way to Odessa?
Why would he go to Odessa?
To kill your wife.
Moss didnt answer. He lay on the rough linen looking at the ceiling. He was in pain and it was
getting worse. You dont know what the hell you're talkin about, he said.
I brought you a couple of photographs.
He rose and laid two photos on the bed and sat back down again. Moss glanced at them. What
am I supposed to make of that? he said.
I took those pictures this morning. The woman lived in an apartment on the second floor of
one of the buildings you shot up. The body's still there.
You're full of shit.
Wells studied him. He turned and looked out the window. You dont have anything to do with
any of this, do you?
No.
You just happened to find the vehicles out there.
I dont know what you're talkin about.
You didnt take the product, did you?
What product.
The heroin. You dont have it.
No. I dont have it.
Wells nodded. He looked thoughtful. Maybe I should ask you what you intend to do.
Maybe I should ask you.
I dont intend to do anything. I dont have to. You'll come to me. Sooner or later. You dont
have a choice. I'm going to give you my mobile phone number.
What makes you think I wont just disappear?
Do you know how long it took me to find you?
No.
About three hours.
You might not get so lucky again.
No, I might not. But that wouldnt be good news for you.
I take it you used to work with him.
Who.
This guy.
Yes. I did. At one time.
What's his name.
Chigurh.
Sugar?
Chigurh. Anton Chigurh.
How do you know I wont cut a deal with him?
Wells sat bent forward in the chair with his forearms across his knees, his fingers laced
together. He shook his head. You're not paying attention, he said.
Maybe I just dont believe what you say.
Yes you do.
Or I might take him out.
Are you in a lot of pain?
Some. Yeah.
You're in a lot of pain. It makes it hard to think. Let me get the nurse.
I dont need you to do me no favors.
All right.
What is he supposed to be, the ultimate bad-ass?
I dont think that's how I would describe him.
How would you describe him.
Wells thought about it. I guess I'd say that he doesnt have a sense of humor.
That aint a crime.
That's not the point. I'm trying to tell you something.
Tell me.
You cant make a deal with him. Let me say it again. Even if you gave him the money he'd still
kill you. There's no one alive on this planet that's ever had even a cross word with him.
They're all dead. These are not good odds. He's a peculiar man. You could even say that he
has principles. Principles that transcend money or drugs or anything like that.
So why would you tell me about him.
You asked about him.
Why would you tell me.
I guess because I think if I could get you to understand the position you're in it would make
my job easier. I dont know anything about you. But I know you're not cut out for this. You
think you are. But you're not.
We'll see, wont we?
Some of us will. What did you do with the money?
I spent about two million dollars on whores and whiskey and the rest of it I just sort of blew it
in.
Wells smiled. He leaned back in the chair and crossed his legs. He wore an expensive pair of
Lucchese crocodile boots. How do you think he found you?
Moss didnt answer.
Have you thought about that?
I know how he found me. He wont do it again.
Wells smiled. Well good on you, he said.
Yeah. Good on me.
There was a pitcher of water on a plastic tray on the bedside table. Moss no more than glanced
at it.
Do you want some water? Wells said.
If I want somethin from you you'll be the first son of a bitch to know about it.
It's called a transponder, Wells said.
I know what it's called.
It's not the only way he has of finding you.
Yeah.
I could tell you some things that would be useful for you to know.
Well, I go back to what I just said. I dont need no favors.
You're not curious to know why I'd tell you?
I know why you'd tell me.
Which is?
You'd rather deal with me than with this sugar guy.
Yes. Let me get you some water.
You go to hell.
Wells sat quietly with his legs crossed. Moss looked at him. You think you can scare me with
this guy. You dont know what you're talkin about. I'll take you out with him if that's what you
want.
Wells smiled. He gave a little shrug. He looked down at the toe of his boot and uncrossed his
legs and passed the toe under his jeans to dust it and recrossed his legs again. What do you
do? he said.
What?
What do you do.
I'm retired.
What did you do before you retired?
I'm a welder.
Acetylene? Mig? Tig?
Any of it. If it can be welded I can weld it.
Cast iron?
Yes.
I dont mean braze.
I didnt say braze.
Pot metal?
What did I say?
Were you in Nam?
Yeah. I was in Nam.
So was I.
So what does that make me? Your buddy?
I was in special forces.
I think you have me confused with somebody who gives a shit what you were in.
I was a lieutenant colonel.
Bullshit.
I dont think so.
And what do you do now.
I find people. Settle accounts. That sort of thing.
You're a hit man.
Wells smiled. A hit man.
Whatever you call it.
The sort of people I contract with like to keep a low profile. They dont like to get involved in
things that draw attention. They dont like things in the paper.
I'll bet.
This isnt going to go away. Even if you got lucky and took out one or two people  which is
unlikely  they'd just send someone else. Nothing would change. They'll still find you.
There's nowhere to go. You can add to your troubles the fact that the people who were
delivering the product dont have that either. So guess who they're looking at? Not to mention
the DEA and various other law enforcement agencies. Everybody's list has got the same name
on it. And it's the only name on it. You need to throw me a bone. I dont really have any reason
to protect you.
Are you afraid of this guy?
Wells shrugged. Wary is the word I'd use.
You didnt mention Bell.
Bell. All right?
I take it you dont think much of him.
I dont think of him at all. He's a redneck sheriff in a hick town in a hick county. In a hick
state. Let me get the nurse. You're not very comfortable. This is my number. I want you to
think it over. What we talked about.
He stood and put a card on the table next to the flowers. He looked at Moss. You think you
wont call me but you will. Just dont wait too long. That money belongs to my client. Chigurh
is an outlaw. Time's not on your side. We can even let you keep some of it. But if I have to
recover the funds from Chigurh then it will be too late for you. Not to mention your wife.
Moss didnt answer.
All right. You might want to call her. When I talked to her she sounded pretty worried.
When he was gone Moss turned up the photographs lying on the bed. Like a player checking
his hole cards. He looked at the pitcher of water but then the nurse came in.
VI
YOUNG PEOPLE ANYMORE they seem to have a hard time growin up. I dont know why.
Maybe it's just that you dont grow up any faster than what you have to. I had a cousin was a
deputized peace officer when he was eighteen. He was married and had a kid at the time. I
had a friend that I grew up with was a ordained Baptist preacher at the same age. Pastor of a
little old country church. He left there to go to Lubbock after about three years and when he
told em he was leavin they just set there in that church and blubbered. Men and women alike.
He'd married em and baptized em and buried em. He was twenty-one years old, maybe
twenty-two. When he preached they'd be standin out in the yard listenin. It surprised me. He
was always quiet in school. I was twenty-one when I went in the army and I was one of the
oldest in our class at boot camp. Six months later I was in France shootin people with a rifle.
I didnt even think it was all that peculiar at the time. Four years later I was sheriff of this
county. I never doubted but what I was supposed to be neither. People anymore you talk
about right and wrong they're liable to smile at you. But I never had a lot of doubts about
things like that. In my thoughts about things like that. I hope I never do.
Loretta told me that she had heard on the radio about some percentage of the children in this
country bein raised by their grandparents. I forget what it was. Pretty high, I thought. Parents
wouldnt raise em. We talked about that. What we thought was that when the next generation
come along and they dont want to raise their children neither then who is goin to do it? Their
own parents will be the only grandparents around and they wouldnt even raise them. We
didnt have a answer about that. On my better days I think that there is somethin I dont know
or there is somethin that I'm leavin out. But them times are seldom. I wake up sometimes way
in the night and I know as certain as death that there aint nothin short of the second comin of
Christ that can slow this train. I dont know what is the use of me layin awake over it. But I do.
I dont believe you could do this job without a wife. A pretty unusual wife at that. Cook and
jailer and I dont know what all. Them boys dont know how good they've got it. Well, maybe
they do. I never worried about her bein safe. They get fresh garden stuff a good part of the
year. Good cornbread. Soupbeans. She's been known to fix em hamburgers and french fries.
We've had em to come back even years later and they'd be married and doin good. Bring their
wives. Bring their kids even. They didnt come back to see me. I've seen em to introduce their
wives or their sweethearts and then just go to bawlin. Grown men. That had done some pretty
bad things. She knew what she was doin. She always did. So we go over budget on the jail
ever month but what are you goin to do about that? You aint goin to do nothin about it. That's
what you're goin to do.
CHIGURH PULLED OFF of the highway at the junction of 131 and opened the telephone
directory in his lap and folded over the bloodstained pages till he got to veterinarian. There
was a clinic outside Bracketville about thirty minutes away. He looked at the towel around his
leg. It was soaked through with blood and blood had soaked into the seat. He threw the
directory in the floor and sat with his hands at the top of the steering wheel. He sat there for
about three minutes. Then he put the vehicle in gear and pulled out onto the highway again.
He drove to the crossroads at La Pryor and took the road north to Uvalde. His leg was
throbbing like a pump. On the highway outside of Uvalde he pulled up in front of the
Cooperative and undid the sashcord from around his leg and pulled away the towel. Then he
got out and hobbled in.
He bought a sack full of veterinary supplies. Cotton and tape and gauze. A bulb syringe and a
bottle of hydrogen peroxide. A pair of forceps. Scissors. Some packets of four inch swabs and
a quart bottle of Betadine. He paid and went out and got in the Ramcharger and started the
engine and then sat watching the building in the rearview mirror. As if he might be thinking
of something else he needed, but that wasnt it. He put his fingers inside the cuff of his shirt
and carefully blotted the sweat from his eyes. Then he put the vehicle in gear and backed out
of the parking space and pulled out onto the highway headed toward town.
He drove down Main Street and turned north on Getty and east again on Nopal where he
parked and shut off the engine. His leg was still bleeding. He got the scissors from the bag
and the tape and he cut a three inch round disc out of the cardboard box that held the cotton.
He put that together with the tape into his shirtpocket. He took a coathanger from the floor
behind the seat and twisted the ends off and straightened it out. Then he leaned and opened
his bag and took out a shirt and cut off one sleeve with the scissors and folded it and put it in
his pocket and put the scissors back in the paper bag from the Cooperative and opened the
door and eased himself down, lifting his injured leg out with both hands under his knee. He
stood there, holding on to the door. Then he bent over with his head to his chest and stood that
way for the better part of a minute. Then he raised up and shut the door and started down the
street.
Outside the drugstore on Main he stopped and turned and leaned against a car parked there.
He checked the street. No one coming. He unscrewed the gascap at his elbow and hooked the
shirtsleeve over the coathanger and ran it down into the tank and drew it out again. He taped
the cardboard over the open gastank and balled the sleeve wet with gasoline over the top of it
and taped it down and lit it and turned and limped into the drugstore. He was little more than
halfway down the aisle toward the pharmacy when the car outside exploded into flame taking
out most of the glass in front of the store.
He let himself in through the little gate and went down the pharmacist's aisles. He found a
packet of syringes and a bottle of Hydrocodone tablets and he came back up the aisle looking
for penicillin. He couldnt find it but he found tetracycline and sulfa. He stuffed these things in
his pocket and came out from behind the counter in the orange glow of the fire and went
down the aisle and picked up a pair of aluminum crutches and pushed open the rear door and
went hobbling out across the gravel parking lot behind the store. The alarm at the rear door
went off but no one paid any attention and Chigurh never had even glanced toward the front
of the store which was now in flames.
He pulled into a motel outside of Hondo and got a room at the end of the building and walked
in and set his bag on the bed. He shoved the pistol under the pillow and went in the bathroom
with the bag from the Cooperative and dumped the contents out into the sink. He emptied his
pockets and laid out everything on the counter-keys, billfold, the vials of antibiotic and the
syringes. He sat on the edge of the tub and pulled off his boots and reached down and put the
plug in the tub and turned on the tap. Then he undressed and eased himself into the tub while
it filled.
His leg was black and blue and swollen badly. It looked like a snakebite. He laved water over
the wounds with a washcloth. He turned his leg in the water and studied the exit wound. Small
pieces of cloth stuck to the tissue. The hole was big enough to put your thumb in.
When he climbed out of the tub the water was a pale pink and the holes in his leg were still
leaking a pale blood dilute with serum. He dropped his boots in the water and patted himself
dry with the towel and sat on the toilet and took the bottle of Betadine and the packet of swabs
from the sink. He tore open the packet with his teeth and unscrewed the bottle and tipped it
slowly over the wounds. Then he set the bottle down and bent to work, picking out the bits of
cloth, using the swabs and the forceps. He sat with the water running in the sink and rested.
He held the tip of the forceps under the faucet and shook away the water and bent to his work
again.
When he was done he disinfected the wound a final time and tore open packets of four by
fours and laid them over the holes in his leg and bound them with gauze off of a roll packaged
for sheep and goats. Then he rose and filled the plastic tumbler on the sink counter with water
and drank it. He filled it and drank twice more. Then he went back into the bedroom and
stretched out on the bed with his leg propped on the pillows. Other than a light beading of
sweat on his forehead there was little evidence that his labors had cost him anything at all.
When he went back into the bathroom he stripped one of the syringes out of the plastic
wrapper and sank the needle through the seal into the vial of tetracycline and drew the glass
barrel full and held it to the light and pressed the plunger with his thumb until a small bead
appeared at the tip of the needle. Then he snapped the syringe twice with his finger and bent
and slid the needle into the quadriceps of his right leg and slowly depressed the plunger.
He stayed in the motel for five days. Hobbling down to the cafe on the crutches for his meals
and back again. He kept the television on and he sat up in the bed watching it and he never
changed channels. He watched whatever came on. He watched soap operas and the news and
talk shows. He changed the dressing twice a day and cleaned the wounds with epsom salt
solution and took the antibiotics. When the maid came the first morning he went to the door
and told her he did not need any service. Just towels and soap. He gave her ten dollars and she
took the money and stood there uncertainly. He told her the same thing in Spanish and she
nodded and put the money in her apron and pushed her cart back up the walkway and he stood
there and studied the cars in the parking lot and then shut the door.
On the fifth night while he was sitting in the cafe two deputies from the Valdez County
Sheriff's Office came in and sat down and removed their hats and put them in the empty
chairs at either side and took the menus from the chrome holder and opened them. One of
them looked at him. Chigurh watched it all without turning or looking. They spoke. Then the
other one looked at him. Then the waitress came. He finished his coffee and rose and left the
money on the table and walked out. He'd left the crutches in the room and he walked slowly
and evenly along the walkway past the cafe window trying not to limp. He walked past his
room to the end of the ramada and turned. He looked at the Ramcharger parked at the end of
the lot. It could not be seen from the office or from the restaurant. He went back to the room
and put his shavingkit and the pistol in his bag and walked out across the parking lot and got
into the Ramcharger and started it and drove over the concrete divider into the parking lot of
the electronics shop next door and out onto the highway.
Wells stood on the bridge with the wind off the river tousling his thin and sandy hair. He
turned and leaned against the fence and raised the small cheap camera he carried and took a
picture of nothing in particular and lowered the camera again. He was standing where Moss
had stood four nights ago. He studied the blood on the walk. Where it trailed off to nothing he
stopped and stood with his arms folded and his chin in his hand. He didnt bother to take a
picture. There was no one watching. He looked out downriver at the slow green water. He
walked a dozen steps and came back. He stepped into the roadway and crossed to the other
side. A truck passed. A light tremor in the superstructure. He went on along the walkway and
then he stopped. Faint outline of a bootprint in blood. Fainter of another. He studied the chainlink
fence to see if there might be blood on the wire. He took his handkerchief from his pocket
and wet it with his tongue and passed it among the diamonds. He stood looking down at the
river. A road down there along the American side. Between the road and the river a thick
stand of carrizo cane. The cane lashed softly in the wind off the river. If he'd carried the
money into Mexico it was gone. But he hadnt.
Wells stood back and looked at the bootprints again. Some Mexicans were coming along the
bridge with their baskets and dayparcels. He took out his camera and snapped a picture of the
sky, the river, the world.
Bell sat at the desk signing checks and totting up figures on a hand calculator. When he was
done he leaned back in his chair and looked out the window at the bleak courthouse lawn.
Molly, he said.
She came and stood in the door.
Did you find anything on any of those vehicles yet?
Sheriff I found out everything there was to find. Those vehicles are titled and registered to
deceased people. The owner of that Blazer died twenty years ago. Did you want me to see
what I could find out about the mexican ones?
No. Lord no. Here's your checks.
She came in and took the big leatherette checkbook off his desk and put it under her arm. That
DEA agent called again. You dont want to talk to him?
I'm goin to try and keep from it as much as I can.
He said he's goin back out there and he wanted to know if you wanted to go with him.
Well that's cordial of him. I guess he can go wherever he wants. He's a certified agent of the
United States Government.
He wanted to know what you were goin to do with the vehicles.
Yeah. I've got to try and sell them things at auction. More county money down the toilet. One
of em has got a hot engine in it. We might be able to get a few dollars for that. No word from
Mrs Moss?
No sir.
All right.
He looked at the clock on the outer office wall. I wonder if I could get you to call Loretta and
tell her I've gone to Eagle Pass and I'll call her from down there. I'd call her but she'll want me
to come home and I just might.
You want me to wait till you've quit the buildin?
Yes I do.
He pushed the chair back and rose and got down his gun-belt from the coatrack behind his
desk and hung it over his shoulder and picked up his hat and put it on. What is it that Torbert
says? About truth and justice?
We dedicate ourselves anew daily. Somethin like that.
I think I'm goin to commence dedicatin myself twice daily. It may come to three fore it's over.
I'll see you in the mornin.
He stopped at the cafe and got a coffee to go and walked out to the cruiser as the flatbed was
coming up the street. Powdered over with the gray desert dust. He stopped and watched it and
then got in the cruiser and wheeled around and drove past the truck and pulled it over. When
he got out and walked back the driver was sitting at the wheel chewing gum and watching him
with a sort of goodnatured arrogance.
Bell put one hand on the cab and looked in at the driver. The driver nodded. Sheriff, he said.
Have you looked at your load lately?
The driver looked in the mirror. What's the problem, Sheriff?
Bell stepped back from the truck. Step out here, he said.
The man opened the door and got out. Bell nodded toward the bed of the truck. That's a
damned outrage, he said.
The man walked back and took a look. One of the tiedowns is worked loose, he said.
He got hold of the loose corner of the tarp and pulled it back up along the bed of the truck
over the bodies lying there, each wrapped in blue reinforced plastic sheeting and bound with
tape. There were eight of them and they looked like just that. Dead bodies wrapped and taped.
How many did you leave with? Bell said.
I aint lost none of em, Sheriff.
Couldnt you all of took a van out there?
We didnt have no van with four wheel drive.
He tied down the corner of the tarp and stood.
All right, Bell said.
You aint goin to write me up for improperly secured load?
You get your ass out of here.
He reached the Devil's River Bridge at sundown and half way across he pulled the cruiser to a
halt and turned on the rooflights and got out and shut the door and walked around in front of
the vehicle and stood leaning on the aluminum pipe that served for the top guardrail.
Watching the sun set into the blue reservoir beyond the railroad bridge to the west. A
westbound semi coming around the long curve of the span downshifted when the lights came
into view. The driver leaned from the window as he passed. Dont jump, Sheriff. She aint
worth it. Then he was gone in a long suck of wind, the diesel engine winding up and the
driver double clutching and shifting gears. Bell smiled. Truth of the matter is, he said, she is.
Some two miles past the junction of 481 and 57 the box sitting in the passenger seat gave off a
single bleep and went silent again. Chigurh pulled onto the shoulder and stopped. He picked
up the box and turned it and turned it back. He adjusted the knobs. Nothing. He pulled out
onto the highway again. The sun pooled in the low blue hills before him. Bleeding slowly
away. A cool and shadowed twilight falling over the desert. He took off his sunglasses and
put them in the glovebox and closed the glovebox door and turned on the headlights. As he
did so the box began to beep with a slow measured time.
He parked behind the hotel and got out and came limping around the truck with the box and
the shotgun and the pistol all in a zipper bag and crossed the parking lot and climbed the hotel
steps.
He registered and got the key and hobbled up the steps and down the hall to his room and
went in and locked the door and lay on the bed with the shotgun across his chest staring at the
ceiling. He could think of no reason for the transponder sending unit to be in the hotel. He
ruled out Moss because he thought Moss was almost certainly dead. That left the police. Or
some agent of the Matacumbe Petroleum Group. Who must think that he thought that they
thought that he thought they were very dumb. He thought about that.
When he woke it was ten-thirty at night and he lay there in the half dark and the quiet but he
knew what the answer was. He got up and put the shotgun behind the pillows and stuck the
pistol into the waistband of his trousers. Then he went out and limped down the stairs to the
desk.
The clerk was sitting reading a magazine and when he saw Chigurh he stuck the magazine
under the desk and rose. Yessir, he said.
I'd like to see the registration.
Are you a police officer?
No. I'm not.
I'm afraid I cant do that sir.
Yes you can.
When he came back up he stopped and stood listening in the hallway outside his door. He
went in and got the shotgun and the receiver and then walked down to the room with the tape
across it and held the box to the door and turned it on. He went down to the second door and
tried the reception there. Then he came back to the first room and opened the door with the
key from the desk and stepped back and stood against the hallway wall.
He could hear traffic in the street beyond the parking lot but still he thought the window was
closed. There was no air moving. He looked quickly into the room. Bed pulled away from the
wall. Bathroom door open. He checked the safety on the shotgun. He stepped across the
doorway to the other side.
There was no one in the room. He scanned the room with the box and found the sending unit
in the drawer of the bedside table. He sat on the bed turning it in his hand. Small lozenge of
burnished metal the size of a domino. He looked out the window at the parking lot. His leg
hurt. He put the piece of metal in his pocket and turned off the receiver and rose and left,
pulling the door shut behind him. Inside the room the phone rang. He thought about that for a
minute. Then he set the transponder on the windowsill in the hallway and turned and went
back down to the lobby.
And there he waited for Wells. No one would do that. He sat in a leather armchair pushed
back into the corner where he could see both the front door and the hallway to the rear. Wells
came in at eleven-thirteen and Chigurh rose and followed him up the stairs, the shotgun
wrapped loosely in the newspaper he'd been reading. Halfway up the stairs Wells turned and
looked back and Chigurh let the paper fall and raised the shotgun to his waist. Hello, Carson,
he said.
They sat in Wells' room, Wells on the bed and Chigurh in the chair by the window. You dont
have to do this, Wells said. I'm a daytrader. I could just go home.
You could.
I'd make it worth your while. Take you to an ATM. Everybody just walks away. There's about
fourteen grand in it.
Good payday.
I think so.
Chigurh looked out the window, the shotgun across his knee. Getting hurt changed me, he
said. Changed my perspective. I've moved on, in a way. Some things have fallen into place
that were not there before. I thought they were, but they werent. The best way I can put it is
that I've sort of caught up with myself. That's not a bad thing. It was overdue.
It's still a good payday.
It is. It's just in the wrong currency.
Wells eyed the distance between them. Senseless. Maybe twenty years ago. Probably not even
then. Do what you have to do, he said.
Chigurh sat slouched casually in the chair, his chin resting against his knuckles. Watching
Wells. Watching his last thoughts. He'd seen it all before. So had Wells.
It started before that, he said. I didnt realize it at the time. When I went down on the border I
stopped in a cafe in this town and there were some men in there drinking beer and one of them
kept looking back at me. I didnt pay any attention to him. I ordered my dinner and ate. But
when I walked up to the counter to pay the check I had to go past them and they were all
grinning and he said something that was hard to ignore. Do you know what I did?
Yeah. I know what you did.
I ignored him. I paid my bill and I had started to push through the door when he said the same
thing again. I turned and looked at him. I was just standing there picking my teeth with a
toothpick and I gave him a little gesture with my head. For him to come outside. If he would
like to. And then I went out. And I waited in the parking lot. And he and his friends came out
and I killed him in the parking lot and then I got into my car. They were all gathered around
him. They didnt know what had happened. They didnt know that he was dead. One of them
said that I had put a sleeper hold on him and then the others all said that. They were trying to
get him to sit up. They were slapping him and trying to get him to sit up. An hour later I was
pulled over by a sheriff's deputy outside of Sonora Texas and I let him take me into town in
handcuffs. I'm not sure why I did this but I think I wanted to see if I could extricate myself by
an act of will. Because I believe that one can. That such a thing is possible. But it was a
foolish thing to do. A vain thing to do. Do you understand?
Do I understand?
Yes.
Do you have any notion of how goddamned crazy you are?
The nature of this conversation?
The nature of you.
Chigurh leaned back. He studied Wells. Tell me something, he said.
What.
If the rule you followed led you to this of what use was the rule?
I dont know what you're talking about.
I'm talking about your life. In which now everything can be seen at once.
I'm not interested in your bullshit, Anton.
I thought you might want to explain yourself.
I dont have to explain myself to you.
Not to me. To yourself. I thought you might have something to say.
You go to hell.
You surprise me, that's all. I expected something different. It calls past events into question.
Dont you think so?
You think I'd trade places with you?
Yes. I do. I'm here and you are there. In a few minutes I will still be here.
Wells looked out the darkened window. I know where the satchel is, he said.
If you knew where the satchel was you would have it.
I was going to have to wait until there was no one around. Till night. Two in the morning.
Something like that.
You know where the satchel is.
Yes.
I know something better.
What's that.
I know where it's going to be.
And where is that.
It will be brought to me and placed at my feet.
Wells wiped his mouth with the back of his hand. It wouldnt cost you anything. It's twenty
minutes from here.
You know that's not going to happen. Dont you?
Wells didnt answer.
Dont you?
You go to hell.
You think you can put it off with your eyes.
What do you mean?
You think that as long as you keep looking at me you can put it off.
I dont think that.
Yes you do. You should admit your situation. There would be more dignity in it. I'm trying to
help you.
You son of a bitch.
You think you wont close your eyes. But you will.
Wells didnt answer. Chigurh watched him. I know what else you think, he said.
You dont know what I think.
You think I'm like you. That it's just greed. But I'm not like you. I live a simple life.
Just do it.
You wouldnt understand. A man like you.
Just do it.
Yes, Chigurh said. They always say that. But they dont mean it, do they?
You piece of shit.
It's not good, Carson. You need to compose yourself. If you dont respect me what must you
think of yourself? Look at where you are.
You think you're outside of everything, Wells said. But you're not.
Not everything. No.
You're not outside of death.
It doesnt mean to me what it does to you.
You think I'm afraid to die?
Yes.
Just do it. Do it and goddamn you.
It's not the same, Chigurh said. You've been giving up things for years to get here. I dont think
I even understood that. How does a man decide in what order to abandon his life? We're in the
same line of work. Up to a point. Did you hold me in such contempt? Why would you do
that? How did you let yourself get in this situation?
Wells looked out at the street. What time is it? he said.
Chigurh raised his wrist and looked at his watch. Eleven fifty-seven he said.
Wells nodded. By the old woman's calendar I've got three more minutes. Well the hell with it.
I think I saw all this coming a long time ago. Almost like a dream. Dj vu. He looked at
Chigurh. I'm not interested in your opinions, he said. Just do it. You goddamned psychopath.
Do it and goddamn you to hell.
He did close his eyes. He closed his eyes and he turned his head and he raised one hand to
fend away what could not be fended away. Chigurh shot him in the face. Everything that
Wells had ever known or thought or loved drained slowly down the wall behind him. His
mother's face, his First Communion, women he had known. The faces of men as they died on
their knees before him. The body of a child dead in a roadside ravine in another country. He
lay half headless on the bed with his arms outflung, most of his right hand missing. Chigurh
rose and picked up the empty casing off the rug and blew into it and put it in his pocket and
looked at his watch. The new day was still a minute away.
He went down the back stairs and crossed the parking lot to Wells' car and sorted out the
doorkey from the ring of keys Wells carried and opened the door and checked the car inside
front and rear and under the seats. It was a rental car and there was nothing in it but the rental
contract in the doorpocket. He shut the door and hobbled back and opened the trunk. Nothing.
He went around to the driver side and opened the door and popped the hood and walked up
front and raised the hood and looked in the engine compartment and then closed the hood and
stood looking at the hotel. While he was standing there Wells' phone rang. He fished the
phone from his pocket and pushed the button and put it to his ear. Yes, he said.
Moss made his way down the ward and back again holding on to the nurse's arm. She said
encouraging things to him in Spanish. They turned at the end of the bay and started back. The
sweat stood on his forehead. Andale, she said. Qu bueno. He nodded. Damn right bueno, he
said.
Late in the night he woke from a troubling dream and struggled down the hallway and asked
to use the telephone. He dialed the number in Odessa and leaned heavily on the counter and
listened to it ring. It rang a long time. Finally her mother answered.
It's Llewelyn.
She dont want to talk to you.
Yes she does.
Do you know what time it is?
I dont care what time it is. Dont you hang up this phone.
I told her what was goin to happen, didnt I? Chapter and verse. I said: This is what will come
to pass. And now it has come to pass.
Dont you hang up this phone. You get her and you put her on.
When she picked up the phone she said: I didnt think you'd do me thisaway.
Hello darlin, how are you? Are you all right, Llewelyn? What happened to them words?
Where are you.
Piedras Negras.
What am I supposed to do, Llewelyn?
Are you all right?
No I'm not all right. How would I be all right? People callin here about you. I had the sheriff
up here from Terrell County. Showed up at the damn door. I thought you was dead.
I aint dead. What did you tell him?
What could I tell him?
He might con you into sayin somethin.
You're hurt, aint you?
What makes you say that?
I can hear it in your voice. Are you okay?
I'm okay.
Where are you?
I told you where I was.
You sound like you're in a bus station.
Carla Jean I think you need to get out of there.
Out of where?
Out of that house.
You're scarin me, Llewelyn. Out of here to go where?
It dont matter. I just dont think you should stay there. You could go to a motel.
And do what with Mama?
She'll be all right.
She'll be all right?
Yes.
You dont know that.
Llewelyn didnt answer.
Do you?
I just dont think anybody will bother her.
You dont think?
You need to get out. Just take her with you.
I cant take my mama to a motel. She's sick if you aint forgot.
What did the sheriff say.
Said he was lookin for you, what do you think he said?
What else did he say.
She didnt answer.
Carla Jean?
She sounded like she was crying.
What else did he say, Carla Jean?
He said you was fixin to get yourself killed.
Well, that's what he would say.
She was quiet a long time.
Carla Jean?
Llewelyn, I dont even want the money. I just want us to be back like we was.
We will be.
No we wont. I've thought about it. It's a false god.
Yeah. But it's real money.
She said his name again and then she did begin to cry. He tried to talk to her but she didnt
answer. He stood there listening to her sobbing quietly in Odessa. What do you want me to
do? he said.
She didnt answer.
Carla Jean?
I want things to be like they was.
If I tell you I'll try and fix everthing will you do what I asked you?
Yes. I will.
I've got a number here I can call. Somebody that can help us.
Can you trust them?
I dont know. I just know I cant trust nobody else. I'll call you tomorrow. I didnt think they'd
find you up there or I never would of sent you. I'll call you tomorrow.
He hung up the phone and dialed the mobile number that Wells had given him. It answered on
the second ring but it wasnt Wells. I think I got the wrong number, he said.
You dont have the wrong number. You need to come see me.
Who is this?
You know who it is.
Moss leaned on the counter, his forehead against his fist.
Where's Wells?
He cant help you now. What kind of a deal did you cut with him?
I didnt cut any kind of a deal.
Yes you did. How much was he going to give you?
I dont know what you're talkin about.
Where's the money.
What did you do with Wells.
We had a difference of opinion. You dont need to concern yourself about Wells. He's out of
the picture. You need to talk to me.
I dont need to talk to you.
I think you do. Do you know where I'm going?
Why would I care where you're goin?
Do you know where I'm going?
Moss didnt answer.
Are you there?
I'm here.
I know where you are.
Yeah? Where am I?
You're in the hospital at Piedras Negras. But that's not where I'm going. Do you know where
I'm going?
Yeah. I know where you're goin.
You can turn all this around.
Why would I believe you?
You believed Wells.
I didnt believe Wells.
You called him.
So I called him.
Tell me what you want me to do.
Moss shifted his weight. Sweat stood on his forehead. He didnt answer.
Tell me something. I'm waiting.
I could be waitin for you when you get there you know, Moss said. Charter a plane. You
thought about that?
That would be okay. But you wont.
How do you know I wont?
You wouldnt have told me. Anyway, I have to go.
You know they wont be there.
It doesnt make any difference where they are.
So what are you goin up there for.
You know how this is going to turn out, dont you?
No. Do you?
Yes. I do. I think you do too. You just havent accepted it yet. So this is what I'll do. You bring
me the money and I'll let her walk. Otherwise she's accountable. The same as you. I dont
know if you care about that. But that's the best deal you're going to get. I wont tell you you
can save yourself because you cant.
I'm goin to bring you somethin all right, Moss said. I've decided to make you a special project
of mine. You aint goin to have to look for me at all.
I'm glad to hear that. You were beginning to disappoint me.
You wont be disappointed.
Good.
You dont have to by god worry about bein disappointed.
He left before daylight dressed in the muslin hospital gown with the overcoat over it. The skirt
of the overcoat was stiff with blood. He had no shoes. In the inside pocket of the coat was the
money he'd folded away there, stiff and bloodstained.
He stood in the street looking toward the lights. He'd no notion where he was. The concrete
cold under his feet. He made his way down to the corner. A few cars passed. He walked down
to the lights at the next corner and stopped and leaned with one hand against the building. He
had two white lozenges in his overcoat pocket that he'd saved and he took one now,
swallowing it dry. He thought he was going to vomit. He stood there for a long time. There
was a windowsill there he'd have sat on save that it was spiked with pointed iron bars to
discourage loiterers. A cab went by and he raised one hand but it kept going. He was going to
have to go out into the street and after a while he did. He'd been tottering there for some time
when another cab passed and he raised his hand and it pulled to the curb.
The driver studied him. Moss leaned on the window. Can you take me across the bridge? he
said.
To the other side.
Yes. To the other side.
You got monies.
Yes. I got monies.
The driver looked dubious. Twenty dollars, he said.
Okay.
At the gate the guard leaned down and regarded him where he sat in the dim rear of the cab.
What country were you born in? he said.
The United States.
What are you bringing in?
Not anything.
The guard studied him. Would you mind stepping out here? he said.
Moss pushed down on the doorhandle and leaned on the front seat to ease himself out of the
cab. He stood.
What happened to your shoes?
I dont know.
You dont have any clothes on, do you?
I got clothes on.
The second guard was waving the cars past. He pointed for the cabdriver. Would you please
pull your cab over into that second space there?
The driver put the cab in gear.
Would you mind stepping away from the vehicle?
Moss stepped away. The cab pulled into the parking area and the driver cut the engine. Moss
looked at the guard. The guard seemed to be waiting for him to say something but he didnt.
They took him inside and sat him in a steel chair in a small white office. Another man came in
and stood leaning against a steel desk. He looked him over.
How much have you had to drink?
I aint had anything to drink.
What happened to you?
What do you mean?
What happened to your clothes.
I dont know.
Do you have any identification?
No.
Nothing.
No.
The man leaned back, his arms crossed at his chest. He said: Who do you think gets to go
through this gate into the United States of America?
I dont know. American citizens.
Some American citizens. Who do you think decides that?
You do I reckon.
That's correct. And how do I decide?
I dont know.
I ask questions. If I get sensible answers then they get to go to America. If I dont get sensible
answers they dont. Is there anything about that that you dont understand?
No sir.
Then maybe you'd like to start over.
All right.
We need to hear more about why you're out here with no clothes on.
I got a overcoat on.
Are you jackin with me?
No sir.
Dont jack with me. Are you in the service?
No sir. I'm a veteran.
What branch of the service.
United States Army.
Were you in Nam?
Yessir. Two tours.
What outfit.
Twelfth Infantry.
What were your dates of tour duty.
August seventh nineteen and sixty-six to September second nineteen and sixty-eight.
The man watched him for some time. Moss looked at him and looked away. He looked
toward the door, the empty hall. Sitting hunched forward in the overcoat with his elbows on
his knees.
Are you all right?
Yessir. I'm all right. I got a wife that'll come and get me if you all will let me go on.
Have you got any money? You got change for a phone call?
Yessir.
He heard claws scrabbling on the tiles. A guard was standing there with a German Shepherd
on a lead. The man jutted his chin at the guard. Get someone to help this man. He needs to get
into town. Is the taxi gone?
Yessir. It was clean.
I know. Get someone to help him.
He looked at Moss. Where are you from?
I'm from San Saba Texas.
Does your wife know where you are?
Yessir. I talked to her here just a while ago.
Did you all have a fight?
Did who have a fight?
You and your wife.
Well. Somewhat of a one I reckon. Yessir.
You need to tell her you're sorry.
Sir?
I said you need to tell her you're sorry.
Yessir. I will.
Even if you think it was her fault.
Yessir.
Go on. Get your ass out of here.
Yessir.
Sometimes you have a little problem and you dont fix it and then all of a sudden it aint a little
problem anymore. You understand what I'm tellin you?
Yessir. I do.
Go on.
Yessir.
It was almost daylight and the cab was long gone. He set out up the street. A bloody serum
was leaking from his wound and it was running down the inside of his leg. People paid him
little mind. He turned up Adams Street and stopped at a clothing store and peered in. Lights
were on at the rear. He knocked at the door and waited and knocked again. Finally a small
man in a white shirt and a black tie opened the door and looked out at him. I know you aint
open, Moss said, but I need some clothes real bad. The man nodded and swung open the door.
Come in, he said.
They walked side by side down the aisle toward the boot section. Tony Lama, Justin, Nocona.
There were some low chairs there and Moss eased himself down and sat with his hands
gripping the chair arms. I need boots and some clothes, he said. I got some medical problems
and I dont want to walk around no more than what I can help.
The man nodded. Yessir, he said. Of course.
Do you carry the Larry Mahans?
No sir. We dont.
That's all right. I need a pair of Wrangler jeans thirty-two by thirty-four length. A shirt size
large. Some socks. And show me some Nocona boots in a ten and a half. And I need a belt.
Yessir. Did you want to look at hats?
Moss looked across the store. I think a hat would be good. You got any of them stockman's
hats with the small brim? Seven and three-eights?
Yes we do. We have a three X beaver in the Resistol and a little better grade in the Stetson. A
five X, I think it is.
Let me see the Stetson. That silverbelly color.
All right sir. Are white socks all right?
White socks is all I wear.
What about underwear?
Maybe a pair of jockey shorts. Thirty-two. Or medium.
Yessir. You just make yourself comfortable. Are you all right?
I'm all right.
The man nodded and turned to go.
Can I ask you somethin? Moss said.
Yessir.
Do you get a lot of people come in here with no clothes on?
No sir. I wouldnt say a lot.
He carried the pile of new clothing with him to the dressingroom and slid off the coat and
hung it from the hook on the back of the door. A pale dried blood was crusted across his
sallow sunken paunch. He pushed at the edges of the tape but they wouldnt stick. He eased
himself down on the wooden bench and pulled on the socks and he opened the package of
shorts and took them out and pulled them over his feet and up to his knees and then stood and
pulled them carefully up over the dressing. He sat again and undid the shirt from its cardboard
forms and endless pins.
When he came out of the dressing room he had the coat over his arm. He walked up and down
the creaking wooden aisle. The clerk stood looking down at the boots. The lizard takes longer
to break in, he said.
Yeah. Hot in the summer too. These are all right. Let's try that hat. I aint been duded up like
this since I got out of the army.
The sheriff sipped his coffee and set the cup back down in the same ring on the glass desktop
that he'd taken it from. They're fixin to close the hotel, he said.
Bell nodded. I aint surprised.
They all quit. That feller hadnt pulled but two shifts. I blame myself. Never occurred to me
that the son of a bitch would come back. I just never even imagined such a thing.
He might never of left.
I thought about that too.
The reason nobody knows what he looks like is that they dont none of em live long enough to
tell it.
This is a goddamned homicidal lunatic, Ed Tom.
Yeah. I dont think he's a lunatic though.
Well what would you call him?
I dont know. When are they fixin to close it?
It's done closed, as far as that goes.
You got a key?
Yeah. I got a key. It's a crime scene.
Why dont we go over there and look around some more.
All right. We can do that.
The first thing they saw was the transponder unit sitting on a windowsill in the hallway. Bell
picked it up and turned it in his hand, looking at the dial and the knobs.
That aint a goddamn bomb is it Sheriff?
No.
That's all we need.
It's a trackin device.
So whatever it was they was trackin they found.
Probably. How long has it been settin there do you reckon?
I dont know. I think I might be able to guess what they were trackin, though.
Maybe, Bell said. There's somethin about this whole deal that dont rattle right.
It aint supposed to.
We got a ex-army colonel here with most of his head gone that you had to ID off of his
fingerprints. What fingers wasnt shot off. Regular army. Fourteen years service. Not a piece
of paper on him.
He'd been robbed.
Yeah.
What do you know about this that you aint tellin, Sheriff?
You got the same facts I got.
I aint talkin about facts. Do you think this whole mess has moved south?
Bell shook his head. I dont know.
You got a dog in this hunt?
Not really. A couple of kids from my county that might be sort of involved that ought not to
be.
Sort of involved.
Yeah.
Are we talkin kin?
No. Just people from my county. People I'm supposed to be lookin after.
He handed the transponder unit to the sheriff.
What am I supposed to do with this?
It's Maverick County property. Crime scene evidence.
The sheriff shook his head. Dope, he said.
Dope.
They sell that shit to schoolkids.
It's worse than that.
How's that?
Schoolkids buy it.
VII
I WONT TALK ABOUT the war neither. I was supposed to be a war hero and I lost a whole
squad of men. Got decorated for it. They died and I got a medal. I dont even need to know
what you think about that. There aint a day I dont remember it. Some boys I know come back
they went on to school up at Austin on the GI Bill, they had hard things to say about their
people. Some of em did. Called em a bunch of rednecks and all such as that. Didnt like their
politics. Two generations in this country is a long time. You're talkin about the early settlers. I
used to tell em that havin your wife and children killed and scalped and gutted like fish has a
tendency to make some people irritable but they didnt seem to know what I was talkin about. I
think the sixties in this country sobered some of em up. I hope it did. I read in the papers here
a while back some teachers come across a survey that was sent out back in the thirties to a
number of schools around the country. Had this questionnaire about what was the problems
with teachin in the schools. And they come across these forms, they'd been filled out and sent
in from around the country answer in these questions. And the biggest problems they could
name was things like talkin in class and runnin in the hallways. Chewin gum. Copyin
homework. Things of that nature. So they got one of them forms that was blank and printed up
a bunch of em and sent em back out to the same schools. Forty years later. Well, here come
the answers back. Rape, arson, murder. Drugs. Suicide. So I think about that. Because a lot of
the time ever when I say anything about how the world is goin to hell in a handbasket people
will just sort of smile and tell me I'm gettin old. That it's one of the symptoms. But my feelin
about that is that anybody that cant tell the difference between rapin and murderin people and
chewin gum has got a whole lot bigger of a problem than what I've got. Forty years is not a
long time neither. Maybe the next forty of it will bring some of em out from under the ether. If
it aint too late.
Here a year or two back me and Loretta went to a conference in Corpus Christi and I got set
next to this woman, she was the wife of somebody or other. And she kept talkin about the right
wing this and the right wing that. I aint even sure what she meant by it. The people I know are
mostly just common people. Common as dirt, as the sayin goes. I told her that and she looked
at me funny. She thought I was sayin somethin bad about em, but of course that's a high
compliment in my part of the world. She kept on, kept on. Finally told me, said: I dont like the
way this country is headed. I want my granddaughter to be able to have an abortion. And I
said well mam I dont think you got any worries about the way the country is headed. The way
I see it goin I dont have much doubt but what she'll be able to have an abortion. I'm goin to
say that not only will she be able to have an abortion, she'll be able to have you put to sleep.
Which pretty much ended the conversation.
CHIGURH LIMPED UP THE seventeen flights of concrete steps in the cool concrete well
and when he got to the steel door on the landing he shot the cylinder out of the lock with the
plunger of the stungun and opened the door and stepped into the hallway and shut the door
behind him. He stood leaning against the door with the shotgun in both hands, listening.
Breathing no harder than if he'd just got up out of a chair. He went down the hallway and
picked the crushed cylinder out of the floor and put it in his pocket and went on to the elevator
and stood listening again. He took off his boots and stood them by the elevator door and went
down the hallway in his sockfeet, walking slowly, favoring his wounded leg.
The doors to the office were open onto the hallway. He stopped. He thought that perhaps the
man did not see his own shadow on the outer hallway wall, illdefined but there. Chigurh
thought it an odd oversight but he knew that fear of an enemy can often blind men to other
hazards, not least the shape which they themselves make in the world. He slipped the strap
from his shoulder and lowered the airtank to the floor. He studied the stance of the man's
shadow framed there by the light from the smoked glass window behind him. He pushed the
shotgun's follower slightly back with the heel of his hand to check the chambered round and
pushed the safety off.
The man was holding a small pistol at the level of his belt. Chigurh stepped into the doorway
and shot him in the throat with a load of number ten shot. The size collectors use to take bird
specimens. The man fell back through his swivel-chair knocking it over and went to the floor
and lay there twitching and gurgling. Chigurh picked up the smoking shotgun shell from the
carpet and put it in his pocket and walked into the room with the pale smoke still drifting from
the canister fitted to the end of the sawed-off barrel. He walked around behind the desk and
stood looking down at the man. The man was lying on his back and he had one hand over his
throat but the blood was pumping steadily through his fingers and out onto the rug. His face
was full of small holes but his right eye seemed intact and he looked up at Chigurh and tried
to speak from out of his bubbling mouth. Chigurh dropped to one knee and leaned on the
shotgun and looked at him. What is it? he said. What are you trying to tell me?
The man moved his head. The blood gurgled in his throat.
Can you hear me? Chigurh said.
He didnt answer.
I'm the man you sent Carson Wells to kill. Is that what you wanted to know?
He watched him. He was wearing a blue nylon runningsuit and a pair of white leather shoes.
Blood was starting to pool about his head and he was shivering as if he were cold.
The reason I used the birdshot was that I didnt want to break the glass. Behind you. To rain
glass on people in the street. He nodded toward the window where the man's upper silhouette
stood outlined in the small gray pockmarks the lead had left in the glass. He looked at the
man. The man's hand had gone slack at his throat and the blood had slowed. He looked at the
pistol lying there. He rose and pushed the safety back on the shotgun and stepped past the
man to the window and inspected the pockings the lead had made. When he looked down at
the man again the man was dead. He crossed the room and stood at the doorway listening. He
went out and down the hall and collected his tank and the stungun and got his boots and
stepped into them and pulled them up. Then he walked down the corridor and went out
through the metal door and down the concrete steps to the garage where he'd left his vehicle.
When they got to the bus station it was just breaking daylight, gray and cold and a light rain
falling. She leaned forward over the seat and paid the driver and gave him a two dollar tip. He
got out and went around to the trunk and opened it and got their bags and set them in the
portico and brought the walker around to her mother's side and opened the door. Her mother
turned and began to struggle out into the rain.
Mama will you wait? I need to get around there.
I knowed this is what it would come to, the mother said. I said it three year ago.
It aint been three years.
I used them very words.
Just wait till I get around there.
In the rain, her mother said. She looked up at the cab-driver. I got cancer, she said. Now look
at this. Not even a home to go to.
Yes mam.
We're goin to El Paso Texas. You know how many people I know in El Paso Texas?
No mam.
She paused with her arm on the door and held up her hand and made an O with her thumb and
forefinger. That's how many, she said.
Yes mam.
They sat in the coffeeshop surrounded by their bags and parcels and stared out at the rain and
at the idling buses. At the gray day breaking. She looked at her mother. Did you want some
more coffee? she said.
The old woman didnt answer.
You aint speakin, I reckon.
I dont know what there is to speak about.
Well I dont guess I do either.
Whatever you all done you done. I dont know why I ought to have to run from the law.
We aint runnin from the law, Mama.
You couldnt call on em to help you though, could you?
Call on who?
The law.
No. We couldnt.
That's what I thought.
The old woman adjusted her teeth with her thumb and stared out the window. After a while
the bus came. The driver stowed her walker in the luggage bay under the bus and they helped
her up the steps and put her in the first seat. I got cancer, she told the driver.
Carla Jean put their bags in the bin overhead and sat down. The old woman didnt look at her.
Three years ago, she said. You didnt have to have no dream about it. No revelation nor nothin.
I dont give myself no credit. Anybody could of told you the same thing.
Well I wasnt askin.
The old woman shook her head. Looking out through the window and down at the table they'd
vacated. I give myself no credit, she said. I'd be the last in the world to do that.
Chigurh pulled up across the street and shut off the engine. He turned off the lights and sat
watching the darkened house. The green diode numerals on the radio put the time at 1:17. He
sat there till 1:22 and then he took the flashlight from the glovebox and got out and closed the
truck door and crossed the street to the house.
He opened the screen door and punched out the cylinder and walked in and shut the door
behind him and stood listening. There was a light coming from the kitchen and he walked
down the hallway with the flashlight in one hand and the shotgun in the other. When he got to
the doorway he stopped and listened again. The light came from a bare bulb on the back
porch. He went on into the kitchen.
A bare formica and chrome table in the center of the room with a box of cereal standing on it.
The shadow of the kitchen window lying on the linoleum floor. He crossed the room and
opened the refrigerator and looked in. He put the shotgun in the crook of his arm and took out
a can of orange soda and opened it with his forefinger and stood drinking it, listening for
anything that might follow the metallic click of the can. He drank and set the half-empty can
on the counter and shut the refrigerator door and walked through the diningroom and into the
livingroom and sat in an easy chair in the corner and looked out at the street.
After a while he rose and crossed the room and went up the stairs. He stood listening at the
head of the stairwell. When he entered the old woman's room he could smell the sweet musty
odor of sickness and he thought for a moment she might even be lying there in the bed. He
switched on the flashlight and went into the bathroom. He stood reading the labels of the
pharmacy bottles on the vanity. He looked out the window at the street below, the dull winter
light from the streetlamps. Two in the morning. Dry. Cold. Silent. He went out and down the
hallway to the small bedroom at the rear of the house.
He emptied her bureau drawers out onto the bed and sat sorting through her things, holding up
from time to time some item and studying it in the bluish light from the yardlamp. A plastic
hairbrush. A cheap fairground bracelet. Weighing these things in his hand like a medium who
might thereby divine some fact concerning the owner. He sat turning the pages in a photo
album. School friends. Family. A dog. A house not this one. A man who may have been her
father. He put two pictures of her in his shirtpocket.
There was a ceiling fan overhead. He got up and pulled the chain and lay down on the bed
with the shotgun alongside him, watching the wooden blades wheel slowly in the light from
the window. After a while he got up and took the chair from the desk in the corner and tilted it
and pushed the top backladder up under the doorknob. Then he sat on the bed and pulled off
his boots and stretched out and went to sleep.
In the morning he walked through the house again upstairs and down and then returned to the
bathroom at the end of the hall to shower. He left the curtain pulled back, the water spraying
onto the floor. The hallway door open and the shotgun lying on the vanity a foot away.
He dried the dressing on his leg with a hairdryer and shaved and dressed and went down to
the kitchen and ate a bowl of cereal and milk, walking through the house as he ate. In the
livingroom he stopped and looked at the mail lying in the floor beneath the brass slot in the
front door. He stood there, chewing slowly. Then he set bowl and spoon on the coffeetable
and crossed the room and bent over and picked up the mail and stood sorting through it. He
sat in a chair by the door and opened the phone bill and cupped the envelope and blew into it.
He glanced down the list of calls. Halfway down was the Terrell County Sheriff's Department.
He folded the bill and put it back in the envelope and put the envelope in his shirt-pocket.
Then he looked through the other pieces of mail again. He rose and went into the kitchen and
got the shotgun off the table and came back and stood where he'd stood before. He crossed to
a cheap mahogany desk and opened the top drawer. The drawer was stuffed with mail. He laid
the shotgun down and sat in the chair and pulled the mail out and piled it on the desk and
began to go through it.
Moss spent the day in a cheap motel on the edge of town sleeping naked in the bed with his
new clothes on wire hangers in the closet. When he woke the shadows were long in the motel
courtyard and he struggled up and sat on the edge of the bed. A pale bloodstain the size of his
hand on the sheets. There was a paper bag on the night table that held things he'd bought from
a drugstore in town and he picked it up and limped into the bathroom. He showered and
shaved and brushed his teeth for the first time in five days and then sat on the edge of the tub
and taped fresh gauze over his wounds. Then he got dressed and called a cab.
He was standing in front of the motel office when the cab pulled up. He climbed into the rear
seat, got his breath, then reached and shut the door. He regarded the face of the driver in the
rearview mirror. Do you want to make some money? he said.
Yeah. I want to make some money.
Moss took five of the hundreds and tore them in two and passed one half across the back of
the seat to the driver. The driver counted the torn bills and put them in his shirtpocket and
looked at Moss in the mirror and waited.
What's your name?
Paul, said the driver.
You got the right attitude, Paul. I wont get you in trouble. I just dont want you to leave me
somewheres that I dont want to be left.
All right.
Have you got a flashlight?
Yeah. I got a flashlight.
Let me have it.
The driver passed the flashlight to the back.
You're the man, Moss said.
Where are we going.
Down the river road.
I aint pickin nobody up.
We're not pickin anybody up.
The driver watched him in the mirror. No drogas, he said.
No drogas.
The driver waited.
I'm goin to pick up a briefcase. It belongs to me. You can look inside if you want. Nothin
illegal.
I can look inside.
Yes you can.
I hope you're not jerkin me around.
No.
I like money but I like stayin out of jail even better.
I'm the same way myself, Moss said.
They drove slowly up the road toward the bridge. Moss leaned forward over the seat. I want
you to park under the bridge, he said.
All right.
I'm goin to unscrew the bulb out of this domelight.
They watch this road round the clock, the driver said.
I know that.
The driver pulled off of the road and shut off the engine and the lights and looked at Moss in
the mirror. Moss took the bulb from the light and laid it in the plastic lens and handed it
across the seat to the driver and opened the door. I should be back in just a few minutes, he
said.
The cane was dusty, the stalks close grown. He pushed his way through carefully, holding the
light at his knees with his hand partly across the lens.
The case was sitting in the brake rightside up and intact as if someone had simply set it there.
He switched off the light and picked it up and made his way back in the dark, taking his sight
by the span of the bridge overhead. When he got to the cab he opened the door and set the
case in the seat and got in carefully and shut the door. He handed the flashlight to the driver
and leaned back in the seat. Let's go, he said.
What's in there, the driver said.
Money.
Money?
Money.
The driver started the engine and pulled out onto the road.
Turn the lights on, Moss said.
He turned the lights on.
How much money?
A lot of money. What will you take to drive me to San Antonio.
The driver thought about it. You mean on top of the five hundred.
Yes.
How about a grand all in.
Everthing.
Yes.
You got it.
The driver nodded. Then how about the other half of these five caesars I already got.
Moss took the bills from his pocket and handed them across the back of the seat.
What if the Migra stop us.
They wont stop us, Moss said.
How do you know?
There's too much shit still down the road that I got to deal with. It aint goin to end here.
I hope you're right.
Trust me, Moss said.
I hate hearin them words, the driver said. I always did.
Have you ever said them?
Yeah. I've said em. That's how come I know what they're worth.
He spent the night in a Rodeway Inn on highway 90 just west of town and in the morning he
went down and got a paper and climbed laboriously back to his room. He couldnt buy a gun
from a dealer because he had no identification but he could buy one out of the paper and he
did. A Tec-9 with two extra magazines and a box and a half of shells. The man delivered the
gun to his door and he paid him in cash. He turned the piece in his hand. It had a greenish
parkerized finish. Semiautomatic. When was the last time you fired it? he said.
I aint never fired it.
Are you sure it fires?
Why would it not?
I dont know.
Well I dont either.
After he left Moss walked out onto the prairie behind the motel with one of the motel pillows
under his arm and he wrapped the pillow about the muzzle of the gun and fired off three
rounds and then stood there in the cold sunlight watching the feathers drift across the gray
chaparral, thinking about his life, what was past and what was to come. Then he turned and
walked slowly back to the motel leaving the burnt pillow on the ground.
He rested in the lobby and then climbed up to the room again. He bathed in the tub and looked
at the exit hole in his lower back in the bathroom mirror. It looked pretty ugly. There were
drains in both holes that he wanted to pull out but he didnt. He pulled loose the plaster on his
arm and looked at the deep furrow the bullet had cut there and then taped the dressing back
again. He dressed and put some more of the bills into the back pocket of his jeans and he
fitted the pistol and the magazines into the case and closed it and called a cab and picked up
the document case and went out and down the stairs.
He bought a 1978 Ford pickup with four wheel drive and a 460 engine from a lot on North
Broadway and paid the man in cash and got the title notarized in the office and put the title in
the glovebox and drove away. He drove back to the motel and checked out and left, the Tec-9
under the seat and the document case and his bag of clothes sitting in the floor on the
passenger side of the truck.
At the onramp at Boerne there was a girl hitchhiking and Moss pulled over and blew the horn
and watched her in the rearview mirror. Running, her blue nylon knapsack slung over one
shoulder. She climbed in the truck and looked at him. Fifteen, sixteen. Red hair. How far are
you goin? she said.
Can you drive?
Yeah. I can drive. It aint no stick shift is it?
No. Get out and come around.
She left her knapsack on the seat and got out of the truck and crossed in front of it. Moss
pushed the knapsack into the floor and eased himself across and she got in and put the truck in
drive and they pulled out onto the interstate.
How old are you?
Eighteen.
Bullshit. What are you doin out here? Dont you know it's dangerous to hitchhike?
Yeah. I know it.
He took off his hat and put it on the seat beside him and leaned back and closed his eyes. Dont
go over the speed limit, he said. You get us stopped by the cops and you and me both will be
in a shitpot full of trouble.
All right.
I'm serious. You go over the speed limit and I'll set your ass out by the side of the road.
All right.
He tried to sleep but he couldnt. He was in a lot of pain. After a while he sat up and got his hat
off the seat and put it on and looked over at the speedometer.
Can I ask you somethin? she said.
You can ask.
Are you runnin from the law?
Moss eased himself in the seat and looked at her and looked out at the highway. What makes
you ask that?
On account of what you said back yonder. About bein stopped by the police.
What if I was?
Then I think I ought to just get out up here.
You dont think that. You just want to know where you stand.
She looked at him out of the corner of her eye. Moss studied the passing country. If you spent
three days with me, he said, I could have you holdin up gas stations. Be no trick at all.
She gave him a funny little half smile. Is that what you do? she said. Hold up gas stations?
No. I dont have to. Are you hungry?
I'm all right.
When did you eat last.
I dont like for people to start askin me when I eat last.
All right. When did you eat last?
I knowed you was a smart-ass from the time I got in the truck.
Yeah. Pull off up here at this next exit. It's supposed to be four miles. And reach me that
machinegun from under the seat.
Bell drove slowly across the cattleguard and got out and closed the gate and got back in the
truck and drove across the pasture and parked at the well and got out and walked over to the
tank. He put his hand in the water and raised a palmful and let it spill again. He took off his
hat and passed his wet hand through his hair and looked up at the windmill. He looked out at
the slow dark elliptic of the blades turning in the dry and windbent grass. A low wooden
trundling under his feet. Then he just stood there paying the brim of his hat slowly through his
fingers. The posture of a man perhaps who has just buried something. I dont know a damn
thing, he said.
When he got home she had supper waiting. He dropped the keys to the pickup in the kitchen
drawer and went to the sink to wash his hands. His wife laid a piece of paper on the counter
and he stood looking at it.
Did she say where she was? This is a West Texas number.
She just said it was Carla Jean and give the number.
He went to the sideboard and called. She and her grandmother were in a motel outside of El
Paso. I need for you to tell me somethin, she said.
All right.
Is your word good?
Yes it is.
Even to me?
I'd say especially to you.
He could hear her breathing in the receiver. Traffic in the distance.
Sheriff?
Yes mam.
If I tell you where he called from do you give your word that no harm will come to him.
I can give my word that no harm will come to him from me. I can do that.
After a while she said: Okay.
The man sitting at the little plywood table that folded up from the wall onto a hinged leg
finished writing on the pad of paper and took off the headset and laid it on the table in front of
him and passed both hands backwards over the sides of his black hair. He turned and looked
toward the rear of the trailer where the second man was stretched out on the bed. Listo? he
said.
The man sat up and swung his legs to the floor. He sat there for a minute and then he rose and
came forward.
You got it?
I got it.
He tore the sheet off the pad and handed it to him and he read it and folded it and put it into
his shirtpocket. Then he reached up and opened one of the kitchen cabinets and took out a
camouflage-finished submachinegun and a pair of spare clips and pushed open the door and
stepped down into the lot and shut the door behind him. He crossed the gravel to where a
black Plymouth Barracuda was parked and opened the door and pitched the machinegun in on
the far seat and lowered himself in and shut the door and started the engine. He blipped the
throttle a couple of times and then pulled out onto the blacktop and turned on the lights and
shifted into second gear and went up the road with the car squatting on the big rear tires and
fishtailing and the tires whining and unspooling clouds of rubbersmoke behind him.
VIII
I'VE LOST A LOT OF friends over these last few years. Not all of em older than me neither.
One of the things you realize about gettin older is that not everbody is goin to get older with
you. You try to help the people that're payin your salary and of course you cant help but think
about the kind of record you leave. This county has not had a unsolved homicide in forty-one
years. Now we got nine of em in one week. Will they be solved? I dont know. Ever day is
against you. Time is not on your side. I dont know as it'd be any compliment if you was known
for second guessin a bunch of dopedealers. Not that they have all that much trouble second
guessin us. They dont have no respect for the law? That aint half of it. They dont even think
about the law. It dont seem to even concern em. Of course here a while back in San Antonio
they shot and killed a federal judge. I guess he concerned em. Add to that that there's peace
officers along this border gettin rich off of narcotics. That's a painful thing to know. Or it is
for me. I dont believe that was true even ten years ago. A crooked peace officer is just a
damned abomination. That's all you can say about it. He's ten times worse than the criminal.
And this aint goin away. And that's about the only thing I do know. It aint goin away. Where
would it go to?
And this may sound ignorant but I think for me the worst of it is knowin that probably the only
reason I'm even still alive is that they have no respect for me. And that's very painful. Very
painful. It has done got way beyond anything you might of thought about even a few years
ago. Here a while back they found a DC-4 over in Presidio County. Just settin out in the
desert. They had come in there of a night and graded out a sort of landin strip and set out
rows of tarbarrels for lights but there was no way you could of flown that thing back out of
there. It was stripped out to the walls. Just had a pilot's seat in it. You could smell the
marijuana, you didnt need no dog. Well the sheriff over there  and I wont say his name 
he wanted to get set up and nail em when they come back for the plane and finally somebody
told him that they wasnt nobody comin back. Never had been. When he finally understood
what it was they was tellin him he just got real quiet and then he turned around and got in his
car and left.
When they was havin them dope wars down across the border you could not buy a half quart
masonjar nowheres. To put up your preserves and such. Your chow chow. They wasnt none to
be had. What it was they was usin them jars to put handgrenades in. If you flew over
somebody's house or compound and you dropped grenades on em they'd go off fore they hit
the ground. So what they done was they'd pull the pin and stick em down in the jar and screw
the lid back on. Then whenever they hit the ground the glass'd break and release the spoon.
The lever. They would preload cases of them things. Hard to believe that a man would ride
around at night in a small plane with a cargo such as that, but they done it.
I think if you were Satan and you were settin around tryin to think up somethin that would just
bring the human race to its knees what you would probably come up with is narcotics. Maybe
he did. I told that to somebody at breakfast the other mornin and they asked me if I believed in
Satan. I said Well that aint the point. And they said I know but do you? I had to think about
that. I guess as a boy I did. Come the middle years my belief I reckon had waned somewhat.
Now I'm startin to lean back the other way. He explains a lot of things that otherwise dont
have no explanation. Or not to me they dont.
MOSS SET THE CASE in the booth and eased himself in after it. He lifted the menu from the
wire rack where it stood along with the mustard and ketchup. She scooted into the booth
opposite. He didnt look up. What are you havin, he said.
I dont know. I aint looked at the menu.
He spun the menu around and slid it in front of her and turned and looked for the waitress.
What are you? the girl said.
What am I havin?
No. What are you. Are you a character?
He studied her. The only people I know that know what a character is, he said, is other
characters.
I might just be a fellow traveler.
Fellow traveler.
Yeah.
Well you are now.
You're hurt, aint you?
What makes you say that?
You cant hardly walk.
Maybe it's just a old war injury.
I dont think so. What happened to you?
You mean lately?
Yeah. Lately.
You dont need to know.
Why not?
I dont want you gettin all excited on me.
What makes you think I'd get excited?
Cause bad girls like bad boys. What are you goin to have?
I dont know. What is it you do?
Three weeks ago I was a law abidin citizen. Workin a nine to five job. Eight to four, anyways.
Things happen to you they happen. They dont ask first. They dont require your permission.
That's the truth if I ever heard it told, she said.
You hang around me you'll hear some more of it.
You think I'm a bad girl?
I think you'd like to be.
What's in that briefcase?
Briefs.
What's in it.
I could tell you, but then I'd have to kill you.
You aint supposed to carry a gun in a public place. Did you not know that? In particular a gun
such as that.
Let me ask you somethin.
Go ahead.
When the shootin starts would you rather be armed or be legal?
I dont want to be around no shootin.
Yes you do. It's wrote all over you. You just dont want to get shot. What are you havin?
What are you?
Cheeseburger and a chocolate milk.
The waitress came and they ordered. She got the hot beef sandwich with mashed potatoes and
gravy. You aint even asked me where I was goin, she said.
I know where you're goin.
Where am I goin then.
Down the road.
That aint no answer.
It's more than just a answer.
You dont know everthing.
No I dont.
You ever kill anybody?
Yeah, he said. You?
She looked embarrassed. You know I aint never killed nobody.
I dont know that.
Well I aint.
You aint, then.
You aint done, either. Are you?
Done what.
What I just said.
Killin people?
She looked around to see if they might be overheard.
Yes, she said.
Be hard to say.
After a while the waitress brought their plates. He bit the corner off a packet of mayonnaise
and squeezed out the contents over his cheeseburger and reached for the ketchup. Where you
from? he said.
She took a drink of her iced tea and wiped her mouth with the paper napkin. Port Arthur, she
said.
He nodded. He took up the cheeseburger in both hands and bit into it and sat back, chewing. I
aint never been to Port Arthur.
I aint never seen you there.
How could you of seen me there if I aint never been there?
I couldnt. I was just sayin I aint. I was agreein with you.
Moss shook his head.
They ate. He watched her.
I reckon you're on your way to California.
How did you know that?
That's the direction you're headed in.
Well that's where I'm goin.
You got any money?
What's it to you?
It aint nothin to me. Do you?
I got some.
He finished the cheeseburger and wiped his hands on the paper napkin and drank the rest of
the milk. Then he reached in his pocket and took out the roll of hundreds and unfolded them.
He counted out a thousand dollars onto the formica and pushed it toward her and put the roll
back in his pocket. Let's go, he said.
What's that for?
To go to California on.
What do I gotta do for it?
You dont have to do nothin. Even a blind sow finds a acorn ever once in a while. Put that up
and let's go.
They paid and walked out to the truck. You wasnt callin me a sow back yonder was you?
Moss ignored her. Give me the keys, he said.
She took the keys from her pocket and handed them over. I thought maybe you'd forgot I had
em, she said.
I dont forget much.
I could of just slipped off like I was goin to the ladies room and took your truck and left you
settin there.
No you couldnt of.
Why not?
Get in the truck.
They got in and he set the case between them and pulled the Tec-9 out of his belt and slid it
under the seat.
Why not? she said.
Dont be ignorant all your life. In the first place I could see all the way to the front door and
out the parkin lot clear to the truck. In the second place even if I was dumb-ass enough to set
with my back to the door I'd of just called a cab and run you down and pulled you over and
beat the shit out of you and left you layin there.
She got real quiet. He put the key in the ignition and started the truck and backed it out.
Would you of done that?
What do you think?
When they pulled into Van Horn it was seven oclock at night. She'd slept a good part of the
way, curled up with her knapsack for a pillow. He pulled into a truckstop and shut off the
engine and her eyes snapped open like a deer's. She sat up and looked at him and then looked
out at the parking lot. Where are we? she said.
Van Horn. You hungry?
I could eat a bite.
You want some diesel fried chicken?
What?
He pointed to the sign overhead.
I aint eatin nothin like that, she said.
She was in the ladies room a long time. When she came out she wanted to know if he'd
ordered.
I did. I ordered some of that chicken for you.
You aint done it, she said.
They ordered steaks. Do you live like this all the time? she said.
Sure. When you're a big time desperado the sky's the limit.
What's that on that chain?
This?
Yeah.
It's a tush off of a wild boar.
What do you wear that for?
It aint mine. I'm just keepin it for somebody.
A lady somebody?
No, a dead somebody.
The steaks came. He watched her eat. Does they anybody know where you're at? he said.
What?
I said does anybody know where you're at.
Like who?
Like anybody.
You.
I dont know where you're at because I dont know who you are.
Well that makes two of us.
You dont know who you are?
No, silly. I dont know who you are.
Well, we'll just keep it that way and they wont neither of us be out nothin. All right?
All right. What'd you ask me that for?
Moss mopped up steak gravy with a half a roll. I just thought it was probably true. For you it's
a luxury. For me it's a necessity.
Why? Because they's somebody after you?
Maybe.
I do like it that way, she said. You got that part right.
It dont take long to get a taste for it, does it?
No, she said. It dont.
Well, it aint as simple as it sounds. You'll see.
Why is that.
There's always somebody knows where you're at. Knows where and why. For the most part.
Are you talkin about God?
No. I'm talkin about you.
She ate. Well, she said. You'd be in a fix if you didnt know where you was at.
I dont know. Would you?
I dont know.
Suppose you was someplace that you didnt know where it was. The real thing you wouldnt
know was where someplace else was. Or how far it was. It wouldnt change nothin about
where you was at.
She thought about that. I try not to think about stuff like that, she said.
You think when you get to California you'll kind of start over.
Them's my intentions.
I think maybe that's the point. There's a road goin to California and there's one comin back.
But the best way would be just to show up there.
Show up there.
Yeah.
You mean and not know how you got there?
Yeah. And not know how you got there.
I dont know how you'd do that.
I dont either. That's the point.
She ate. She looked around. Can I get some coffee? she said.
You can get anything you want. You got money.
She looked at him. I guess I aint sure what the point is, she said.
The point is there aint no point.
No. I mean what you said. About knowin where you are.
He looked at her. After a while he said: It's not about knowin where you are. It's about thinkin
you got there without takin anything with you. Your notions about startin over. Or anybody's.
You dont start over. That's what it's about. Ever step you take is forever. You cant make it go
away. None of it. You understand what I'm sayin?
I think so.
I know you dont but let me try it one more time. You think when you wake up in the mornin
yesterday dont count. But yesterday is all that does count. What else is there? Your life is
made out of the days it's made out of. Nothin else. You might think you could run away and
change your name and I dont know what all. Start over. And then one mornin you wake up
and look at the ceilin and guess who's layin there?
She nodded.
You understand what I'm sayin?
I understand that. I been there.
Yeah, I know you have.
So are you sorry you become a outlaw?
Sorry I didnt start sooner. Are you ready?
When he came out of the motel office he handed her a key.
What's that?
That's your key.
She hefted it in her hand and looked at him. Well, she said. It's up to you.
Yes it is.
I guess you're afraid I'll see what's in that bag.
Not really.
He started the truck and pulled down the parking lot behind the motel office.
Are you queer? she said.
Me? Yeah, I'm queer as a coot.
You dont look it.
Is that right? You know a lot of queers?
You dont act it I guess I should say.
Well darlin what would you know about it?
I dont know.
Say it again.
What?
Say it again. I dont know.
I dont know.
That's good. You need to practice that. It sounds good on you.
Later he went out and drove down to the quickstop. When he pulled back into the motel he sat
there studying the cars in the lot. Then he got out.
He walked down to her room and tapped at the door. He waited. He tapped again. He saw the
curtain move and then she opened the door. She stood there in the same jeans and T-shirt. She
looked like she'd just woken up.
I know you aint old enough to drink but I thought I'd see if you wanted a beer.
Yeah, she said. I'd drink a beer.
He lifted one of the cold bottles out of the brown paper bag and handed it to her. Here you go,
he said.
He'd already turned to go. She stepped out and let the door shut behind her. You dont need to
rush off thataway, she said.
He stopped on the lower step.
You got another one of these in that sack?
Yeah. I got two more. And I aim to drink both of em.
I just meant maybe you could set here and drink one of em with me.
He squinted at her. You ever notice how women have trouble takin no for a answer? I think it
starts about age three.
What about men?
They get used to it. They better.
I wont say a word. I'll just set here.
You wont say a word.
No.
Well that's already a lie.
Well I wont say hardly nothin. I'll be real quiet.
He sat on the step and pulled one of the beers from the bag and twisted off the cap and tilted
the bottle and drank. She sat on the next step up and did the same.
You sleep a lot? he said.
I sleep when I get the chance. Yeah. You?
I aint had a night's sleep in about two weeks. I dont know what it would feel like. I think it's
beginnin to make me stupid.
You dont look stupid to me.
Well, that's by your lights.
What does that mean?
Nothin. I'm just raggin you. I'll quit.
You aint got drugs in that satchel have you?
No. Why? You use drugs?
I'd smoke some weed if you had some.
Well I aint.
That's all right.
Moss shook his head. He drank.
I just meant it's all right we could just set out here and drink a beer.
Well I'm glad to hear that's all right.
Where are you headin? You aint never said.
Hard to say.
You aint goin to California though, are you?
No. I aint.
I didnt think so.
I'm goin to El Paso.
I thought you didnt know where you was goin.
Maybe I just decided.
I dont think so.
Moss didnt answer.
This is nice settin out here, she said.
I guess it depends on where you been settin.
You aint just got out of the penitentiary or somethin have you?
I just got off of death row. They'd done shaved my head for the electric chair. You can see
where it's started to grow back.
You're full of it.
Be funny if it turned out to be true though, wouldnt it?
Is the law huntin you?
Everbody's huntin me.
What did you do?
I been pickin up young girls hitchhikin and buryin em out in the desert.
That aint funny.
You're right. It aint. I was just pullin your leg.
You said you'd quit.
I will.
Do you ever tell the truth?
Yeah. I tell the truth.
You're married, aint you?
Yeah.
What's your wife's name?
Carla Jean.
Is she in El Paso?
Yeah.
Does she know what you do for a livin?
Yeah. She knows. I'm a welder.
She watched him. To see what else he would say. He didnt say anything.
You aint no welder, she said.
Why aint I?
What have you got that machinegun for?
Cause they's some bad people after me.
What did you do to em?
I took somethin that belongs to em and they want it back.
That dont sound like weldin to me.
It dont, does it? I guess I hadnt thought of that.
He sipped the beer. Holding it by the neck between his thumb and forefinger.
And that's what's in that bag. Aint it?
Hard to say.
Are you a safecracker?
A safecracker?
Yeah.
Whatever give you that notion?
I dont know. Are you?
No.
Well you're somethin. Aint you?
Everbody's somethin.
You ever been to California?
Yeah. I been to California. I got a brother lives there.
Does he like it?
I dont know. He lives there.
You wouldnt live there though, would you?
No.
You think that's where I ought to go?
He looked at her and looked away again. He stretched his legs out on the concrete and crossed
his boots and looked out across the parking lot toward the highway and the lights on the
highway. Darlin, he said, how in the hell would I know where you ought to go?
Yeah. Well, I appreciate you givin me that money.
You're welcome.
You didnt have to do that.
I thought you wasnt goin to talk.
All right. That's a lot of money though.
It aint half what you think it is. You'll see.
I wont blow it in. I need money to get me a place to stay.
You'll be all right.
I hope so.
Best way to live in California is to be from somewheres else. Probably the best way is to be
from Mars.
I hope not. Cause I aint.
You'll be all right.
Can I ask you somethin?
Yeah. Go ahead.
How old are you?
Thirty-six.
That's pretty old. I didnt know you was that old.
I know. It kind of took me by surprise my own self.
I got a feelin I ought to be afraid of you but I aint.
Well. I cant advise you on that neither. Most people'll run from their own mother to get to hug
death by the neck. They cant wait to see him.
I guess that's what you think I'm doin.
I dont even want to know what you're doin.
I wonder where I'd be right now if I hadnt of met you this mornin.
I dont know.
I was always lucky. About stuff like that. About meetin people.
Well, I wouldnt speak too soon.
Why? You fixin to bury me out in the desert?
No. But there's a lot of bad luck out there. You hang around long enough and you'll come in
for your share of it.
I think I done have. I believe I'm due for a change. I might even be overdue.
Yeah? Well you aint.
Why do you say that?
He looked at her. Let me tell you somethin, little sister. If there is one thing on this planet that
you dont look like it's a bunch of good luck walkin around.
That's a hateful thing to say.
No it aint. I just want you to be careful. We get to El Paso I'm goin to drop you at the bus
station. You got money. You dont need to be out here hitchhikin.
All right.
All right.
Would you of done what you said back yonder? About if I had of took your truck?
What's that?
You know. About beatin the crap out of me.
No.
I didn't think so.
You want to split this last beer?
All right.
Run in there and get a cup. I'll be back in a minute.
All right. You aint changed your mind have you?
About what?
You know about what.
I dont change my mind. I like to get it right the first time.
He rose and started up the walkway. She stood at the door. I'll tell you somethin I heard in a
movie one time, she said.
He stopped and turned. What's that?
There's a lot of good salesmen around and you might buy somethin yet.
Well darlin you're just a little late. Cause I done bought. And I think I'll stick with what I got.
He went on up the walkway and climbed the stairs and went in.
The Barracuda pulled into a truckstop outside of Balmorhea and drove into the bay of the
adjoining carwash. The driver got out and shut the door and looked at it. There was blood and
other matter streaked over the glass and over the sheet-metal and he walked out and got
quarters from a change-machine and came back and put them in the slot and took down the
wand from the rack and washed the car and rinsed it off and got back in and pulled out onto
the highway going west.
Bell left the house at seven-thirty and took 285 north to Fort Stockton. It was about a two
hundred mile run to Van Horn and he reckoned he could make it in under three hours. He
turned the rooflights on. About ten miles west of Fort Stockton on the I-10 interstate he
passed a car burning by the side of the highway. There were police cars at the scene and one
lane of the highway was blocked off. He didnt stop but it gave him an uneasy feeling. He
stopped at Balmorhea and refilled his coffeebottle and he pulled into Van Horn at ten twentyfive.
He didnt know what he was looking for but he didnt have to. In the parking lot of a motel
there were two Culberson County patrol cars and a state police car all with their lights going.
The motel was cordoned off with yellow tape. He pulled in and parked and left his own lights
on.
The deputy didnt know him but the sheriff did. They were questioning a man sitting in his
shirtsleeves in the open back door of one of the cruisers. Damn if bad news dont travel fast,
the sheriff said. What are you doin up here, Sheriff?
What's happened, Marvin?
Had a little shoot-out. You know anything about this?
I dont know. You got any victims?
They left out of here about a half hour ago in the ambulance. Two men and a woman. The
woman was dead and the one boy I dont think is goin to make it either. The other one might.
Do you know who they were?
No. One of the men was Mexican and we're waitin for a registration on his car settin over
yonder. Wasnt a one of em had any identification. On em or in the room either one.
What does this man say?
He says the Mexican started it. Says he drug the woman out of her room and the other man
come out with a gun but when he seen the Mexican had a gun pointed at the woman's head he
laid his own piece down. And whenever he done that the Mexican shoved the woman away
and shot her and then turned and shot him. He was standin in front of 117, right yonder. Shot
em with a goddamned machinegun. Accordin to this witness the old boy fell down the steps
and then he picked up his gun again and shot the Mexican. Which I dont see how he done it.
He was shot all to pieces. You can see the blood on the walkway yonder. We had a real good
response time. About seven minutes, I think. The girl was just shot dead.
No ID.
No ID. The other old boy's truck is got dealer tags on it.
Bell nodded. He looked at the witness. The witness had asked for a cigarette and he lit it and
sat smoking. He looked pretty comfortable. He looked as if he'd sat in the back of police
cruisers before.
That woman, Bell said. Was she anglo?
Yeah. She was anglo. Had blonde hair. Sort of reddish, maybe.
Did you all find any dope?
Not yet. We're still lookin.
Any money?
We aint found nothin yet. The girl was checked into 121. Had a knapsack with some clothes
in it and stuff was all.
Bell looked down the row of motel doors. People standing around in small groups talking. He
looked at the black Barracuda.
Has that thing got anything to turn them tires with?
I'd say it would turn em pretty good. It's got a four-forty under the hood with a blower on it.
A blower?
Yep.
I dont see one.
It's one of them sidewinders. It's all under the hood.
Bell stood looking at the car. Then he turned and looked at the sheriff. Can you get away from
here for a minute?
I can. What did you have in mind?
I just thought I might get you to ride over to the clinic with me.
All right. Just ride with me.
That'll be fine. Let me just park my cruiser a little better.
Hell, it's all right, Ed Tom.
Let me just pull it up here out of the way. You dont always know how quick you'll be back
when you set off someplace.
At the desk the sheriff spoke to the night nurse by name. She looked at Bell.
He's up here to make a identification, the sheriff said.
She nodded and rose and put her pencil in the pages of the book she was reading. Two of em
were DOA, she said. They flew that Mexican out of here in a helicopter about twenty minutes
ago. Or maybe you already knew that.
Nobody tells me nothin, darlin, the sheriff said.
They followed her down the hallway. There was a thin trail of blood along the concrete floor.
They wouldnt of been hard to find, would they? Bell said.
There was a red sign at the end of the hall that read Exit. Before they got there she turned and
fitted a key to a steel door on the left and opened it and switched on the light. The room was
raw concrete block, windowless and empty save for three steel machinist's tables on wheels.
On two of them lay bodies covered with plastic sheets. She stood with her back to the open
door while they filed past.
He aint a friend of yours is he Ed Tom?
No.
He took a couple of rounds in the face so I dont think he's goin to look too good. Not that I
aint seen worse. That highway out there is a goddamn warzone, you tell the truth about it.
He pulled back the sheet. Bell walked around the end of the table. There was no chock under
Moss's neck and his head was turned to the side. One eye partly opened. He looked like a
badman on a slab. They'd sponged the blood off of him but there were holes in his face and
his teeth were shot out.
Is that him?
Yeah, that's him.
You look like you wished it wasnt.
I get to tell his wife.
I'm sorry about that.
Bell nodded.
Well, the sheriff said. There aint nothin you could of done about it.
No, Bell said. But you always like to think there is.
The sheriff covered Moss's face and reached and lifted back the plastic at the other table and
looked at Bell. Bell shook his head.
They'd rented two rooms. Or he did. Paid cash. You couldnt read the name on the register.
Just a scrawl.
His name was Moss.
All right. We'll get your information down at the office. Kind of a skankylookin little old girl.
Yeah.
He covered her face again. I dont reckon his wife is goin to like that part of it neither, he said.
No, I dont expect she will.
The sheriff looked at the nurse. She was still standing leaning against the door. How many
times was she hit? he said. Do you know?
No I dont, Sheriff. You can look at her if you want. I dont mind and I know she wont.
That's all right. It'll be on the autopsy. Are you ready, Ed Tom?
Yeah. I was ready fore I come in here.
He sat in the sheriff's office alone with the door shut and stared at the phone on the desk.
Finally he got up and went out. The deputy looked up.
He's gone home, I reckon.
Yessir, the deputy said. Can I help you with somethin, Sheriff?
How far is it to El Paso?
It's about a hundred and twenty miles.
You tell him I said thank you and I'll give him a call tomorrow.
Yessir.
He stopped and ate on the far side of town and sat in the booth and sipped his coffee and
watched the lights out on the highway. Something wrong. He couldnt make sense out of it. He
looked at his watch. 1:20. He paid and walked out and got in the cruiser and sat there. Then he
drove to the intersection and turned east and drove back to the motel again.
Chigurh checked into a motel on the eastbound interstate and walked out across a windy field
in the dark and watched across the highway through a pair of binoculars. The big overland
trucks loomed up in the glasses and drew away. He squatted on his heels with his elbows on
his knees, watching. Then he went back to the motel.
He set his alarm for one oclock and when it went off he got up and showered and dressed and
walked out to his truck with his small leather bag and put it behind the seat.
He parked in the motel parking lot and he sat there for some time. Leaning back in the seat
and watching in the rearview mirror. Nothing. The police cars were long gone. The yellow
police tape across the door lifted in the wind and the trucks droned past headed for Arizona
and California. He got out and walked up to the door and blew out the lock with his stungun
and walked in and shut the door behind him. He could see the room pretty well by the light
through the windows. Small spills of light from the bulletholes in the plywood door. He
pulled the little bedside table over to the wall and stood and took a screwdriver from his rear
pocket and began to back the screws out of the louvered steel cover of the airduct. He set it on
the table and reached in and pulled out the bag and stepped down and walked over to the
window and looked out at the parking lot. He took the pistol from behind his belt and opened
the door and stepped out and closed it behind him and stooped under the tape and walked
down to his truck and got in.
He set the bag in the floor and he'd reached for the key to turn on the ignition when he saw the
Terrell County cruiser pull into the lot in front of the motel office a hundred feet away. He let
go of the key and sat back. The cruiser pulled into a parking space and the lights went out.
Then the motor. Chigurh waited, the pistol in his lap.
When Bell got out he took a look around the lot and then walked up to the door at 117 and
tried the knob. The door was unlocked. He ducked under the tape and pushed the door open
and reached and found the wallswitch and turned on the light.
The first thing he saw was the grille and the screws lying on the table. He shut the door
behind him and stood there. He stepped to the window and looked past the edge of the curtain
out at the parking lot. He stood there for some time. Nothing moved. He saw something lying
in the floor and stepped over and picked it up but he already knew what it was. He turned it in
his hand. He walked over and sat on the bed and weighed the little piece of brass in his palm.
Then he tilted it into the ashtray on the bedside table. He picked up the telephone but the line
was dead. He put the receiver back in the cradle. He took his pistol from the holster and
flipped open the gate and checked the shells in the cylinder and closed the gate with his thumb
and sat with the pistol resting on his knee.
You dont know for sure that he's out there, he said.
Yes you do. You knew it at the restaurant. That's why you come back here.
Well what do you aim to do?
He got up and walked over and switched off the light. Five bulletholes in the door. He stood
with the revolver in his hand, his thumb on the knurled hammer. Then he opened the door and
walked out.
He walked to the cruiser. Studying the cars in the lot. Pickup trucks for the most part. You
could always see the muzzleflash first. Just not first enough. Can you feel it when someone is
watching you? A lot of people thought so. He reached the cruiser and opened the door with
his left hand. The domelight came on. He stepped in and pulled the door shut and laid the
pistol on the seat beside him and got out his key and put it in the ignition and started the car.
Then he backed out of the parking space and switched on the lights and swung out of the lot.
When he was out of sight of the motel he pulled over onto the shoulder and took the speaker
from the hook and called the sheriff's office. They sent two cars. He hung the mike up and put
the cruiser in neutral and rolled back down the edge of the highway until he could just see the
motel sign. He looked at his watch. 1:45. That seven minute time would make it 1:52. He
waited. At the motel nothing moved. At 1:52 he saw them come down the highway and tail
each other up the offramp with sirens on and lights blazing. He kept his eyes on the motel.
Any vehicle that came out of the lot and headed up the access road he'd already determined to
run it off the road.
When the cruisers pulled into the motel he started the car and turned on the lights and did a Uturn
and went back down the road the wrong way and pulled into the lot and got out.
They went down the parking lot vehicle by vehicle with flashlights and their guns drawn and
came back again. Bell was the first one back and he stood leaning against his cruiser. He
nodded to the deputies. Gentlemen, he said. I think we been outgeneraled.
They holstered their pistols. He and the chief deputy walked over to the room and Bell
showed him the lock and the airvent and the lock cylinder.
What's he done that with, Sheriff? the deputy said, holding the cylinder in his hand.
It's a long story, Bell said. I'm sorry to of got you all out here for nothin.
Not a problem, Sheriff.
You tell the sheriff I'll call him from El Paso.
Yessir, I'll sure do it.
Two hours later he checked into the Rodeway Inn on the east side of town and got the key and
went to his room and went to bed. He woke at six as he always did and got up and closed the
curtains and went back to bed but he couldnt sleep. Finally he got up and showered and
dressed and went down to the coffeeshop and got his breakfast and read the paper. There'd be
nothing about Moss and the girl yet. When the waitress came with more coffee he asked her
what time they got the evening paper.
I dont know, she said. I quit readin it.
I dont blame you. I would if I could.
I quit readin it and I made my husband quit readin it.
Is that right?
I dont know why they call it a newspaper. I dont call that stuff news.
No.
When was the last time you read somethin about Jesus Christ in the newspaper?
Bell shook his head. I dont know, he said. I guess I'd have to say it would be a while.
I guess it would too, she said. A long while.
He'd knocked on other doors with the same sort of message, it wasnt all that new to him. He
saw the window curtain move slightly and then the door opened and she stood there in jeans
with her shirttail out looking at him. No expression. Just waiting. He took off his hat and she
leaned against the doorjamb and turned her face away.
I'm sorry, mam, he said.
Oh God, she said. She staggered back into the room and slumped to the floor and buried her
face in her forearms with her hands over her head. Bell stood there holding his hat. He didnt
know what to do. He couldnt see any sign of the grandmother. Two Spanish maids were
standing in the parking lot watching and whispering to each other. He stepped into the room
and closed the door.
Carla Jean, he said.
Oh God, she said.
I'm just as sorry as I can be.
Oh God.
He stood there, his hat in his hand. I'm sorry, he said.
She raised her head and looked at him. Her crumpled face. Damn you, she said. You stand
there and tell me you're sorry? My husband is dead. Do you understand that? You say you're
sorry one more time and by God if I wont get my gun and shoot you.
IX
I HAD TO TAKE HER at her word. Not a lot else you could do. I never saw her again. I
wanted to tell her that the way they had it in the papers wasnt right. About him and that girl.
It turned out she was a runaway. Fifteen years old. I dont believe that he had anything to do
with her and I hate it that she thought that. Which you know she did. I called her a number of
times but she'd hang up on me and I cant blame her. Then when they called me from Odessa
and told me what had happened I couldnt hardly believe it. It didnt make no sense. I drove up
there but there wasnt nothin to be done. Her grandmother had just died too. I tried to see if I
could get his fingerprints off the FBI database but they just drew a blank. Wanted to know
what his name was and what he'd done and all such as that. You end up lookin like a fool.
He's a ghost. But he's out there. You wouldnt think it would be possible to just come and go
thataway. I keep waitin to hear somethin else. Maybe I will yet. Or maybe not. It's easy to fool
yourself. Tell yourself what you want to hear. You wake up in the night and you think about
things. I aint sure anymore what it is I do want to hear. You tell yourself that maybe this
business is over. But you know it aint. You can wish all you want.
My daddy always told me to just do the best you knew how and tell the truth. He said there
was nothin to set a man's mind at ease like wakin up in the morning and not havin to decide
who you were. And if you done somethin wrong just stand up and say you done it and say
you're sorry and get on with it. Dont haul stuff around with you. I guess all that sounds pretty
simple today. Even to me. All the more reason to think about it. He didnt say a lot so I tend to
remember what he did say. And I dont remember that he had a lot of patience with havin to
say things twice so I learned to listen the first time. I might of strayed from all of that some as
a younger man but when I got back on that road I pretty much decided not to quit it again and
I didnt. I think the truth is always simple. It has pretty much got to be. It needs to be simple
enough for a child to understand. Otherwise it'd be too late. By the time you figured it out it
would be too late.
CHIGURH STOOD AT THE receptionist's desk dressed in suit and tie. He set the case in the
floor at his feet and looked around the office.
How do you spell that? she said.
He told her.
Is he expecting you?
No. He's not. But he's going to be glad to see me.
Just a minute.
She buzzed the inner office. There was a silence. Then she hung the phone up. Go right in,
she said.
He opened the door and walked in and a man at the desk stood up and looked at him. He came
around the desk and held out his hand. I know that name, he said.
They sat on a sofa in the corner of the office and Chigurh set the case on the coffeetable and
nodded at it. That's yours, he said.
What is it?
It's some money that belongs to you.
The man sat looking at the case. Then he got up and went over to the desk and leaned and
pushed a button. Hold my calls, he said.
He turned and put his hands on either side of the desk behind him and leaned back and studied
Chigurh. How did you find me? he said.
What difference does it make?
It makes a difference to me.
You dont have to worry. Nobody else is coming.
How do you know?
Because I'm in charge of who is coming and who is not. I think we need to address the issue
here. I dont want to spend a lot of time trying to put your mind at ease. I think it would be
both hopeless and thankless. So let's talk about money.
All right.
Some of it is missing. About a hundred thousand dollars. Part of that was stolen and part of it
went to cover my expenses. I've been at some pains to recover your property so I'd prefer not
to be addressed as some sort of bearer of bad news here. There is two point three mil in that
case. I'm sorry I couldnt recover it all, but there you are.
The man hadnt moved. After a while he said: Who the hell are you?
My name is Anton Chigurh.
I know that.
Then why did you ask?
What do you want. I guess that's my question.
Well. I'd say that the purpose of my visit is simply to establish my bonafides. As someone
who is an expert in a difficult field. As someone who is completely reliable and completely
honest. Something like that.
Someone I might do business with.
Yes.
You're serious.
Completely.
Chigurh watched him. He watched the dilation in his eyes and the pulse in the artery of his
neck. The rate of his breathing. When he'd first put his hands on the desk behind him he had
looked somewhat relaxed. He was still standing in the identical attitude but he didnt look that
way anymore.
There's not a bomb in that damn bag is there?
No. No bombs.
Chigurh undid the straps and unlatched the brass hasp and opened the leather flap and tipped
the case forward.
Yes, the man said. Put that away.
Chigurh closed the bag. The man stood up from his leaning against the desk. He wiped his
mouth with his foreknuckle.
I think what you need to consider, Chigurh said, is how you lost this money in the first place.
Who you listened to and what happened when you did.
Yes. We cant talk here.
I understand. In any case I dont expect you to absorb all of this at one sitting. I'll call you in
two days time.
All right.
Chigurh rose from the couch. The man nodded toward the case. You could do a lot of
business on your own with that, he said.
Chigurh smiled. We have a lot to talk about, he said. We'll be dealing with new people now.
There wont be any more problems.
What happened to the old people?
They've moved on to other things. Not everyone is suited to this line of work. The prospect of
outsized profits leads people to exaggerate their own capabilities. In their minds. They pretend
to themselves that they are in control of events where perhaps they are not. And it is always
one's stance upon uncertain ground that invites the attentions of one's enemies. Or discourages
it.
And you? What about your enemies?
I have no enemies. I dont permit such a thing.
He looked around the room. Nice office, he said. Low key. He nodded to a painting on the
wall. Is that original?
The man looked at the painting. No, he said. It's not. But I own the original. I keep it in a
vault.
Excellent, said Chigurh.
The funeral was on a cold and windy day in March. She stood beside her grandmother's sister.
The sister's husband sat in front of her in a wheelchair with his chin resting in his hand. The
dead woman had more friends than she would have reckoned. She was surprised. They'd
come with their faces veiled in black. She put her hand on her uncle's shoulder and he reached
up across his chest and patted it. She had thought maybe he was asleep. The whole while that
the wind blew and the preacher talked she had the feeling that someone was watching her.
Twice she even looked around.
It was dark when she got home. She went into the kitchen and put the kettle on and sat at the
kitchen table. She hadnt felt like crying. Now she did. She lowered her face into her folded
arms. Oh Mama, she said.
When she went upstairs and turned on the light in her bedroom Chigurh was sitting at the little
desk waiting for her.
She stood in the doorway, her hand falling slowly away from the wallswitch. He moved not at
all. She stood there, holding her hat. Finally she said: I knowed this wasnt done with.
Smart girl.
I aint got it.
Got what?
I need to set down.
Chigurh nodded toward the bed. She sat and put her hat on the bed beside her and then picked
it up again and held it to her.
Too late, Chigurh said.
I know.
What is it that you havent got?
I think you know what I'm talkin about.
How much do you have.
I dont have none of it. I had about seven thousand dollars all told and I can tell you it's been
long gone and they's bills aplenty left to pay yet. I buried my mother today. I aint paid for that
neither.
I wouldnt worry about it.
She looked at the bedside table.
It's not there, he said.
She sat slumped forward, holding her hat in her arms. You've got no cause to hurt me, she
said.
I know. But I gave my word.
Your word?
Yes. We're at the mercy of the dead here. In this case your husband.
That dont make no sense.
I'm afraid it does.
I dont have the money. You know I aint got it.
I know.
You give your word to my husband to kill me?
Yes.
He's dead. My husband is dead.
Yes. But I'm not.
You dont owe nothin to dead people.
Chigurh cocked his head slightly. No? he said.
How can you?
How can you not?
They're dead.
Yes. But my word is not dead. Nothing can change that.
You can change it.
I dont think so. Even a nonbeliever might find it useful to model himself after God. Very
useful, in fact.
You're just a blasphemer.
Hard words. But what's done cannot be undone. I think you understand that. Your husband,
you may be distressed to learn, had the opportunity to remove you from harm's way and he
chose not to do so. He was given that option and his answer was no. Otherwise I would not be
here now.
You aim to kill me.
I'm sorry.
She put the hat down on the bed and turned and looked out the window. The new green of the
trees in the light of the vaporlamp in the yard bending and righting again in the evening wind.
I dont know what I ever done, she said. I truly dont.
Chigurh nodded. Probably you do, he said. There's a reason for everything.
She shook her head. How many times I've said them very words. I wont again.
You've suffered a loss of faith.
I've suffered a loss of everthing I ever had. My husband wanted to kill me?
Yes. Is there anything that you'd like to say?
To who?
I'm the only one here.
I dont have nothin to say to you.
You'll be all right. Try not to worry about it.
What?
I see your look, he said. It doesn't make any difference what sort of person I am, you know.
You shouldnt be more frightened to die because you think I'm a bad person.
I knowed you was crazy when I seen you settin there, she said. I knowed exactly what was in
store for me. Even if I couldnt of said it.
Chigurh smiled. It's a hard thing to understand, he said. I see people struggle with it. The look
they get. They always say the same thing.
What do they say.
They say: You dont have to do this.
You dont.
It's not any help though, is it?
No.
So why do you say it?
I aint never said it before.
Any of you.
There's just me, she said. There aint nobody else.
Yes. Of course.
She looked at the gun. She turned away. She sat with her head down, her shoulders shaking.
Oh Mama, she said.
None of this was your fault.
She shook her head, sobbing.
You didnt do anything. It was bad luck.
She nodded.
He watched her, his chin in his hand. All right, he said. This is the best I can do.
He straightened out his leg and reached into his pocket and drew out a few coins and took one
and held it up. He turned it. For her to see the justice of it. He held it between his thumb and
forefinger and weighed it and then flipped it spinning in the air and caught it and slapped it
down on his wrist. Call it, he said.
She looked at him, at his outheld wrist. What? She said.
Call it.
I wont do it.
Yes you will. Call it.
God would not want me to do that.
Of course he would. You should try to save yourself. Call it. This is your last chance.
Heads, she said.
He lifted his hand away. The coin was tails.
I'm sorry.
She didnt answer.
Maybe it's for the best.
She looked away. You make it like it was the coin. But you're the one.
It could have gone either way.
The coin didnt have no say. It was just you.
Perhaps. But look at it my way. I got here the same way the coin did.
She sat sobbing softly. She didnt answer.
For things at a common destination there is a common path. Not always easy to see. But there.
Everthing I ever thought has turned out different, she said. There aint the least part of my life
I could of guessed. Not this, not none of it.
I know.
You wouldnt of let me off noway.
I had no say in the matter. Every moment in your life is a turning and every one a choosing.
Somewhere you made a choice. All followed to this. The accounting is scrupulous. The shape
is drawn. No line can be erased. I had no belief in your ability to move a coin to your bidding.
How could you? A person's path through the world seldom changes and even more seldom
will it change abruptly. And the shape of your path was visible from the beginning.
She sat sobbing. She shook her head.
Yet even though I could have told you how all of this would end I thought it not too much to
ask that you have a final glimpse of hope in the world to lift your heart before the shroud
drops, the darkness. Do you see?
Oh God, she said. Oh God.
I'm sorry.
She looked at him a final time. You dont have to, she said. You dont. You dont.
He shook his head. You're asking that I make myself vulnerable and that I can never do. I
have only one way to live. It doesnt allow for special cases. A coin toss perhaps. In this case
to small purpose. Most people dont believe that there can be such a person. You can see what
a problem that must be for them. How to prevail over that which you refuse to acknowledge
the existence of. Do you understand? When I came into your life your life was over. It had a
beginning, a middle, and an end. This is the end. You can say that things could have turned
out differently. That they could have been some other way. But what does that mean? They
are not some other way. They are this way. You're asking that I second say the world. Do you
see?
Yes, she said, sobbing. I do. I truly do.
Good, he said. That's good. Then he shot her.
The car that hit Chigurh in the intersection three blocks from the house was a ten year old
Buick that had run a stop-sign. There were no skidmarks at the site and the vehicle had made
no attempt to brake. Chigurh never wore a seatbelt driving in the city because of just such
hazards and although he saw the vehicle coming and threw himself to the other side of the
truck the impact carried the caved-in driver side door to him instantly and broke his arm in
two places and broke some ribs and cut his head and his leg. He crawled out of the passenger
side door and staggered to the sidewalk and sat in the grass of someone's lawn and looked at
his arm. Bone sticking up under the skin. Not good. A woman in a housedress ran out
screaming.
Blood kept running into his eyes and he tried to think. He held the arm and turned it and tried
to see how badly it was bleeding. If the median artery were severed. He thought not. His head
was ringing. No pain. Not yet.
Two teenage boys were standing there looking at him.
Are you all right, mister?
Yeah, he said. I'm all right. Let me just sit here a minute.
There's an ambulance comin. Man over yonder went to call one.
All right.
You sure you're all right.
Chigurh looked at them. What will you take for that shirt? he said.
They looked at each other. What shirt?
Any damn shirt. How much?
He straightened out his leg and reached in his pocket and got out his moneyclip. I need
something to wrap around my head and I need a sling for this arm.
One of the boys began to unbutton his shirt. Hell, mister. Why didnt you say so? I'll give you
my shirt.
Chigurh took the shirt and bit into it and ripped it in two down the back. He wrapped his head
in a bandanna and he twisted the other half of the shirt into a sling and put his arm in it.
Tie this for me, he said.
They looked at each other.
Just tie it.
The boy in the T-shirt stepped forward and knelt and knotted the sling. That arm dont look
good, he said.
Chigurh thumbed a bill out of the clip and put the clip back in his pocket and took the bill
from between his teeth and got to his feet and held it out.
Hell, mister. I dont mind helpin somebody out. That's a lot of money.
Take it. Take it and you dont know what I looked like. You hear?
The boy took the bill. Yessir, he said.
They watched him set off up the sidewalk, holding the twist of the bandanna against his head,
limping slightly. Part of that's mine, the other boy said.
You still got your damn shirt.
That aint what it was for.
That may be, but I'm still out a shirt.
They walked out into the street where the vehicles sat steaming. The streetlamps had come on.
A pool of green antifreeze was collecting in the gutter. When they passed the open door of
Chigurh's truck the one in the T-shirt stopped the other with his hand. You see what I see? he
said.
Shit, the other one said.
What they saw was Chigurh's pistol lying in the floorboard of the truck. They could already
hear the sirens in the distance. Get it, the first one said. Go on.
Why me?
I aint got a shirt to cover it with. Go on. Hurry.
HE CLIMBED THE THREE wooden steps to the porch and tapped loosely at the door with
the back of his hand. He took off his hat and pressed his shirtsleeve against his forehead and
put his hat back on again.
Come in, a voice called.
He opened the door and stepped into the cool darkness. Ellis?
I'm back here. Come on back.
He walked through to the kitchen. The old man was sitting beside the table in his chair. The
room smelled of old bacon-grease and stale woodsmoke from the stove and over it all lay a
faint tang of urine. Like the smell of cats but it wasnt just cats. Bell stood in the doorway and
took his hat off. The old man looked up at him. One clouded eye from a cholla spine where a
horse had thrown him years ago. Hey, Ed Tom, he said. I didnt know who that was.
How are you makin it?
You're lookin at it. You by yourself?
Yessir.
Set down. You want some coffee?
Bell looked at the clutter on the checked oilcloth. Bottles of medicine. Breadcrumbs.
Quarterhorse magazines. Thank you no, he said. I appreciate it.
I had a letter from your wife.
You can call her Loretta.
I know I can. Did you know she writes me?
I guess I knew she'd wrote you a time or two.
It's more than a time or two. She writes pretty regular. Tells me the family news.
I didnt know there was any.
You might be surprised.
So what was special about this letter then.
She just told me you was quittin, that's all. Set down.
The old man didnt watch to see if he would or he wouldnt. He fell to rolling himself a
cigarette from a sack of tobacco at his elbow. He twisted the end in his mouth and turned it
around and lit it with an old Zippo lighter worn through to the brass. He sat smoking, holding
the cigarette pencilwise in his fingers.
Are you all right? Bell said.
I'm all right.
He wheeled the chair slightly sideways and watched Bell through the smoke. I got to say you
look older, he said.
I am older.
The old man nodded. Bell had pulled out a chair and sat and he put his hat on the table.
Let me ask you somethin, he said.
All right.
What's your biggest regret in life.
The old man looked at him, gauging the question. I dont know, he said. I aint got all that
many regrets. I could imagine lots of things that you might think would make a man happier. I
reckon bein able to walk around might be one. You can make up your own list. You might
even have one. I think by the time you're grown you're as happy as you're goin to be. You'll
have good times and bad times, but in the end you'll be about as happy as you was before. Or
as unhappy. I've knowed people that just never did get the hang of it.
I know what you mean.
I know you do.
The old man smoked. If what you're askin me is what made me the unhappiest then I think
you already know that.
Yessir.
And it aint this chair. And it aint this cotton eye.
Yessir. I know that.
You sign on for the ride you probably think you got at least some notion of where the ride's
goin. But you might not. Or you might of been lied to. Probably nobody would blame you
then. If you quit. But if it's just that it turned out to be a little roughern what you had in mind.
Well. That's somethin else.
Bell nodded.
I guess some things are better not put to the test.
I guess that's right.
What would it take to run Loretta off?
I dont know. I guess I'd have to do somethin that was pretty bad. It damn sure wouldnt be just
cause things got a little rough. She's done been there a time or two.
Ellis nodded. He tipped the ash from his smoke into a jar-lid on the table. I'll take your word
on that, he said.
Bell smiled. He looked around. How fresh is that coffee?
I think it's all right. I generally make a fresh pot here ever week even if there is some left over.
Bell smiled again and rose and carried the pot to the counter and plugged it in.
They sat at the table drinking coffee out of the same crazed porcelain cups that had been in
that house since before he was born. Bell looked at the cup and he looked around the kitchen.
Well, he said. Some things dont change, I reckon.
What would that be? the old man said.
Hell, I dont know.
I dont either.
How many cats you got?
Several. Depends on what you mean by got. Some of em are half wild and the rest are just
outlaws. They run out the door when they heard your truck.
Did you hear the truck?
How's that?
I said did you You're havin a little fun with me.
What give you that idea?
Did you?
No. I seen the cats skedaddle.
You want some more of this?
I'm done.
The man that shot you died in prison.
In Angola. Yes.
What would you of done if he'd been released?
I dont know. Nothin. There wouldnt be no point to it. There aint no point to it. Not to any of
it.
I'm kindly surprised to hear you say that.
You wear out, Ed Tom. All the time you spend tryin to get back what's been took from you
there's more goin out the door. After a while you just try and get a tourniquet on it. Your
grandad never asked me to sign on as deputy with him. I done that my own self. Hell, I didnt
have nothin else to do. Paid about the same as cowboyin. Anyway, you never know what
worse luck your bad luck has saved you from. I was too young for one war and too old for the
next one. But I seen what come out of it. You can be patriotic and still believe that some
things cost more than what they're worth. Ask them Gold Star mothers what they paid and
what they got for it. You always pay too much. Particularly for promises. There aint no such
thing as a bargain promise. You'll see. Maybe you done have.
Bell didnt answer.
I always thought when I got older that God would sort of come into my life in some way. He
didnt. I dont blame him. If I was him I'd have the same opinion about me that he does.
You dont know what he thinks.
Yes I do.
He looked at Bell. I can remember one time you come to see me after you all had moved to
Denton. You walked in and you looked around and you asked me what I intended to do.
All right.
You wouldnt ask me now though, would you?
Maybe not.
You wouldnt.
He sipped the rank black coffee.
You ever think about Harold? Bell said.
Harold?
Yes.
Not much. He was some older than me. He was born in ninety-nine. Pretty sure that's right.
What made you think about Harold?
I was readin some of your mother's letters to him, that's all. I just wondered what you
remembered about him.
Was they any letters from him?
No.
You think about your family. Try to make sense out of all that. I know what it did to my
mother. She never got over it. I dont know what sense any of that makes either. You know
that gospel song? We'll understand it all by and by? That takes a lot of faith. You think about
him goin over there and dyin in a ditch somewheres. Seventeen year old. You tell me.
Because I damn sure dont know.
I hear you. Did you want to go somewheres?
I dont need nobody haulin me around. I aim to just set right here. I'm fine, Ed Tom.
It aint no trouble.
I know it.
All right.
Bell watched him. The old man stubbed out his cigarette in the lid. Bell tried to think about
his life. Then he tried not to. You aint turned infidel have you Uncle Ellis?
No. No. Nothin like that.
Do you think God knows what's happenin?
I expect he does.
You think he can stop it?
No. I dont.
They sat quietly at the table. After a while the old man said: She mentioned there was a lot of
old pictures and family stuff. What to do about that. Well. There aint nothin to do about it I
dont reckon. Is there?
No. I dont reckon there is.
I told her to send Uncle Mac's old cinco peso badge and his thumb-buster to the Rangers. I
believe they got a museum. But I didnt know what to tell her. There's all that stuff here. In the
chifforobe in yonder. That rolltop desk is full of papers. He tilted the cup and looked into the
bottom of it.
He never rode with Coffee Jack. Uncle Mac. That's all bull. I dont know who started that. He
was shot down on his own porch in Hudspeth County.
That's what I always heard.
They was seven or eight of em come to the house. Wantin this and wantin that. He went back
in the house and come out with a shotgun but they was way ahead of him and they shot him
down in his own doorway. She run out and tried to stop the bleedin. Tried to get him back in
the house. Said he kept tryin to get hold of the shotgun again. They just set there on their
horses. Finally left. I dont know why. Somethin scared em, I reckon. One of em said somethin
in injun and they all turned and left out. They never come in the house or nothin. She got him
inside but he was a big man and they was no way she could of got him up in the bed. She
fixed a pallet on the floor. Wasnt nothin to be done. She always said she should of just left
him there and rode for help but I dont know where it was she would of rode to. He wouldnt of
let her go noway. Wouldnt hardly let her go in the kitchen. He knew what the score was if she
didnt. He was shot through the right lung. And that was that. As they say.
When did he die?
Eighteen and seventy-nine.
No, I mean was it right away or in the night or when was it.
I believe it was that night. Or early of the mornin. She buried him herself. Diggin in that hard
caliche. Then she just packed the wagon and hitched the horses and pulled out of there and
she never did go back. That house burned down sometime back in the twenties. What hadnt
fell down. I could take you to it today. The rock chimney used to be standin and it may be yet.
There was a good bit of land proved up on. Eight or ten sections if I remember. She couldnt
pay the taxes on it, little as they was. Couldnt sell it. Did you remember her?
No. I seen a photograph of me and her when I was about four. She's settin in a rocker on the
porch of this house and I'm standin alongside of her. I wish I could say I remember her but I
dont.
She never did remarry. Later years she was a schoolteacher. San Angelo. This country was
hard on people. But they never seemed to hold it to account. In a way that seems peculiar.
That they didnt. You think about what all has happened to just this one family. I dont know
what I'm doin here still knockin around. All them young people. We dont know where half of
em is even buried at. You got to ask what was the good in all that. So I go back to that. How
come people dont feel like this country has got a lot to answer for? They dont. You can say
that the country is just the country, it dont actively do nothin, but that dont mean much. I seen
a man shoot his pickup truck with a shotgun one time. He must of thought it done somethin.
This country will kill you in a heartbeat and still people love it. You understand what I'm
sayin?
I think I do. Do you love it?
I guess you could say I do. But I'd be the first one to tell you I'm as ignorant as a box of rocks
so you sure dont want to go by nothin I'd say.
Bell smiled. He got up and went to the sink. The old man turned the chair slightly to where he
could see him. What are you doin? he said.
I thought I'd just wash these here dishes.
Hell, leave em, Ed Tom. Lupe'll be here in the mornin.
It wont take but a minute.
The water from the tap was gypwater. He filled the sink and added a scoop of soap powder.
Then he added another.
I thought you used to have a television set in here.
I used to have a lot of things.
Why didnt you say somethin? I'll get you one.
I dont need one.
Keep you company some.
It didnt quit on me. I throwed it out.
You dont never watch the news?
No. Do you?
Not much.
He rinsed the dishes and left them to drain and stood looking out the window at the little
weedgrown yard. A weathered smokehouse. An aluminum two horse trailer on blocks. You
used to have chickens, he said.
Yep, the old man said.
Bell dried his hands and came back to the table and sat. He looked at his uncle. Did you ever
do anything you was ashamed of to the point where you never would tell nobody?
His uncle thought about that. I'd say I have, he said. I'd say about anybody has. What is it
you've found out about me?
I'm serious.
All right.
I mean somethin bad.
How bad.
I dont know. Where it stuck with you.
Like somethin you could go to jail for?
Well, it could be somethin like that I reckon. It wouldnt have to be.
I'd have to think about that.
No you wouldnt.
What's got into you? I aint goin to invite you out here no more.
You didnt invite me this time.
Well. That's true.
Bell sat with his elbows on the table and his hands folded together. His uncle watched him. I
hope you aint fixin to make some terrible confession, he said. I might not want to hear it.
Do you want to hear it?
Yeah. Go ahead.
All right.
It aint of a sexual nature is it?
No.
That's all right. Go ahead and tell it anyways.
It's about bein a war hero.
All right. Would that be you?
Yeah. That'd be me.
Go ahead.
I'm tryin to. This is actually what happened. What got me that commendation.
Go ahead.
We was in a forward position monitorin radio signals and we was holed up in a farmhouse.
Just a two room stone house. We'd been there two days and it never did quit rainin. Rained
like all get-out. Somewhere about the middle of the second day the radio operator had took his
headset off and he said: Listen. Well, we did. When somebody said listen you listened. And
we didnt hear nothin. And I said: What is it? And he said: Nothin.
I said What the hell are you talkin about, nothin? What did you hear? And he said: I mean you
cant hear nothin. Listen. And he was right. There was not a sound nowheres. No field-piece or
nothin. All you could hear was the rain. And that was about the last thing I remember. When I
woke up I was layin outside in the rain and I dont know how long I'd been layin there. I was
wet and cold and my ears was ringin and whenever I set up and looked the house was gone.
Just part of the wall at one end was standin was all. A mortarshell had come through the wall
and just blowed it all to hell. Well, I couldnt hear a thing. I couldnt hear the rain or nothin. If I
said somethin I could hear it inside my head but that was all. I got up and walked over to
where the house was and there was sections of the roof layin over a good part of it and I seen
one of our men buried in them rocks and timbers and I tried to move some stuff to see if I
couldnt get to him. My whole head just felt numb. And while I was doin that I raised up and
looked out and here come these German riflemen across this field. They was comin out of a
patch of woods about two hundred yards off and comin across this field. I still didnt know
exactly what had happened. I was kindly in a daze. I crouched down there by the side of the
wall and the first thing I seen was Wallace's .30 caliber stickin out from under some timbers.
That thing was aircooled and it was belt fed out of a metal box and I figured if I let em run up
a little more on me I could operate on em out there in the open and they wouldnt call in
another round cause they'd be too close. I scratched around and finally got that thing dug out,
it and the tripod, and I dug around some more and come up with the ammo box for it and I got
set up behind the section of wall there and jacked back the slide and pushed off the safety and
here we went.
It was hard to tell where the rounds was hittin on account of the ground bein wet but I knew I
was doin some good. I emptied out about two feet of belt and I kept watchin out there and
after it'd been quiet two or three minutes one of them krauts jumped up and tried to make a
run for the woods but I was ready for that. I kept the rest of em pinned down and all the while
I could hear some of our men groanin and I sure didnt know what I was goin to do come dark.
And that's what they give me the Bronze Star for. The major that put me in for it was named
McAllister and he was from Georgia. And I told him I didnt want it. And he just set there
lookin at me and directly he said: I'm waitin on you to tell me your reasons for wantin to
refuse a military commendation. So I told him. And when I got done he said: Sergeant, you
will accept the commendation. I guess they had to make it look good. Look like it counted for
somethin. Losin the position. He said you will accept it and if you tell it around what you told
me it will get back to me and when it does you are goin to wish you was in hell with your
back broke. Is that clear? And I said yessir. Said that was about as clear as you could make it.
So that was it.
So now you're fixin to tell me what you done.
Yessir.
When it got dark.
When it got dark. Yessir.
What did you do?
I cut and run.
The old man thought about that. After a while he said: I got to assume that it seemed like a
pretty good idea at the time.
Yeah, Bell said. It did.
What would of happened if you'd stayed there?
They'd of come up in the dark and lobbed grenades in on me. Or maybe gone back up in the
woods and called in another round.
Yeah.
Bell sat there with his hands crossed on the oilcloth. He looked at his uncle. The old man said:
I aint sure what it is you're askin me.
I aint either.
You left your buddies behind.
Yeah.
You didnt have no choice.
I had a choice. I could of stayed.
You couldnt of helped em.
Probably not. I thought about takin that .30 caliber off about a hundred feet or so and waitin
till they throwed their grenades or whatever. Lettin em come on up. I could of killed a few
more. Even in the dark. I dont know. I set there and watched it come night. Pretty sunset. It
had done cleared up by then. Had finally quit rainin. That field had been sowed in oats and
there was just the stalks. Fall of the year. I watched it get dark and I had not heard nothin from
anybody that was in the wreckage there for a while. They might could of all been dead by
then. But I didnt know that. And quick as it got dark I got up and I left out of there. I didnt
even have a gun. I dang sure wasnt haulin that .30 caliber with me. My head had quit hurtin
some and I could even hear a little. It had quit rainin but I was wet through and I was cold to
where my teeth was chatterin. I could make out the dipper and I headed due west as near as I
could make it and I just kept goin. I passed a house or two but there wasnt nobody around. It
was a battle-zone, that country. People had just left out. Come daylight I laid up in a patch of
woods. What woods it was. That whole country looked like a burn. Just the treetrunks was all
that was left. And sometime that next night I come to an American position and that was
pretty much it. I thought after so many years it would go away. I dont know why I thought
that. Then I thought that maybe I could make up for it and I reckon that's what I have tried to
do.
They sat. After a while the old man said: Well, in all honesty I cant see it bein all that bad.
Maybe you ought to ease up on yourself some.
Maybe. But you go into battle it's a blood oath to look after the men with you and I dont know
why I didnt. I wanted to. When you're called on like that you have to make up your mind that
you'll live with the consequences. But you dont know what the consequences will be. You end
up layin a lot of things at your own door that you didnt plan on. If I was supposed to die over
there doin what I'd give my word to do then that's what I should of done. You can tell it any
way you want but that's the way it is. I should of done it and I didnt. And some part of me has
never quit wishin I could go back. And I cant. I didnt know you could steal your own life.
And I didnt know that it would bring you no more benefit than about anything else you might
steal. I think I done the best with it I knew how but it still wasnt mine. It never has been.
The old man sat for a long time. He was bent slightly forward looking at the floor. After a
while he nodded. I think I know where this is goin, he said.
Yessir.
What do you think he would of done?
I know what he would of done.
Yeah. I guess I do too.
He'd of set there till hell froze over and then stayed a while on the ice.
Do you think that makes him a better man than you?
Yessir. I do.
I might could tell you some things about him that would change your mind. I knew him pretty
good.
Well sir, I doubt that you could. With all due respect. Besides which I doubt that you would.
I aint. But then I might say that he lived in different times. Had Jack of been born fifty years
later he might of had a different view of things.
You might. But nobody in this room would believe it.
Yeah, I expect that's true. He looked up at Bell. What did you tell me for?
I think I just needed to unload my wagon.
You waited long enough about doin it.
Yessir. Maybe I needed to hear it myself. I'm not the man of an older time they say I am. I
wish I was. I'm a man of this time.
Or maybe this was just a practice run.
Maybe.
You aim to tell her?
Yessir, I guess I do.
Well.
What do you think she'll say?
Well, I expect you might come out of it a little better than what you think.
Yessir, Bell said. I surely hope so.
X
HE SAID I WAS BEIN hard on myself Said it was a sign of old age. Tryin to set things right. I
guess there's some truth to that. But it aint the whole truth. I agreed with him that there wasnt
a whole lot good you could say about old age and he said he knew one thing and I said what
is that. And he said it dont last long. I waited for him to smile but he didnt. I said well, that's
pretty cold. And he said it was no colder than what the facts called for. So that was all there
was about that. I knew what he'd say anyways, bless his heart. You care about people you try
and lighten their load for em. Even when it's self-ordained. The other thing that was on my
mind I never even got around to but I believe it to be related because I believe that whatever
you do in your life it will get back to you. If you live long enough it will. And I can think of no
reason in the world for that no-good to of killed that girl. What did she ever do to him? The
truth is I never should of gone up there in the first place. Now they got that Mexican up here
in Huntsville for killin that state trooper that he shot him and set his car afire and him in it
and I dont believe he done it. But that's what he's goin to get the death penalty for. So what is
my obligation there? I think I have sort of waited for all of this to go away somehow or
another and of course it aint. I think I knew that when it started. It had that feel to it. Like I
was fixin to get drug into somethin where the road back was goin to be a pretty long one.
When he asked me why this come up now after so many years I said that it had always been
there. That I had just ignored it for the most part. But he's right, it did come up. I think
sometimes people would rather have a bad answer about things than no answer at all. When I
told it, well it took a shape I would not have guessed it to have and in that way he was right
too. It was like a ballplayer told me one time he said that if he had some slight injury and it
bothered him a little bit, nagged at him, he generally played better. It kept his mind focused
on one thing instead of a hundred. I can understand that. Not that it changes anything.
I thought if I lived my life in the strictest way I knew how then I would not ever again have a
thing that would eat on me thataway. I said that I was twenty-one years old and I was entitled
to one mistake, particularly if I could learn from it and become the sort of man I had it in my
mind to be. Well, I was wrong about all of that. Now I aim to quit and a good part of it is just
knowin that I wont be called on to hunt this man. I reckon he's a man. So you could say to me
that I aint changed a bit and I dont know that I would even have a argument about that.
Thirty-six years. That's a painful thing to know.
One other thing he said. You'd think a man that had waited eighty some odd years on God to
come into his life, well, you'd think he'd come. If he didnt you'd still have to figure that he
knew what he was doin. I dont know what other description of God you could have. So what
you end up with is that those he has spoke to are the ones that must of needed it the worst.
That's not a easy thing to accept. Particularly as it might apply to someone like Loretta. But
then maybe we are all of us lookin through the wrong end of the glass. Always have been.
Aunt Carolyn's letters to Harold. The reason she had them letters was that he had saved em.
She was the one raised him and she was the same as his mother. Them letters was dogeared
and tore and covered with mud and I dont know what all. The thing about them letters. Well
for one thing you could tell they were just country people. I dont think he'd ever been out of
Irion County, let alone the State of Texas. But the thing about them letters was you could tell
that the world she was plannin on him comin back to was not ever goin to be here. Easy to see
now. Sixty some years on. But they just had no notion at all. You can say you like it or you
dont like it but it dont change nothin. I've told my deputies more than once that you fix what
you can fix and you let the rest go. If there aint nothin to be done about it it aint even a
problem. It's just a aggravation. And the truth is I dont have no more idea of the world that is
brewin out there than what Harold did.
Of course as it turned out he never come home at all. There was not nothin in them letters to
suggest that she had reckoned on that possibility.
Well, you know she did. She just wouldnt of said nothin about it to him.
I've still got that medal of course. It come in a fancy purple box with a ribbon and all. It was
in my bureau for years and then one day I took it out and put it in the drawer in the livin room
table where I wouldnt have to look at it. Not that I ever looked at it, but it was there. Harold
didnt get no medal. He just come home in a wooden box. And I dont believe they had Gold
Star mothers in the First World War but if they had of Aunt Carolyn would not of got one of
them either since he was not her natural son. But she should of. She never got his war pension
neither.
So. I went back out there one more time. I walked over that ground and there was very little
sign that anything had ever took place there. I picked up a shellcasin or two. That was about
it. I stood out there a long time and I thought about things. It was one of them warm days you
get in the winter sometimes. A little wind. I still keep thinkin maybe it is somethin about the
country. Sort of the way Ellis said. I thought about my family and about him out there in his
wheelchair in the old house and it just seemed to me that this country has got a strange kind
of history and a damned bloody one too. About anywhere you care to look. I could stand back
off and smile about such thoughts as them but I still have em. I dont make excuses for the way
I think. Not no more. I talk to my daughter. She would be thirty now. That's all right. I dont
care how that sounds. I like talkin to her. Call it superstition or whatever you want. I know
that over the years I have give her the heart I always wanted for myself and that's all right.
That's why I listen to her. I know I'll always get the best from her. It dont get mixed up with
my own ignorance or my own meanness. I know how that sounds and I guess I'd have to say
that I dont care. I never even told my wife and we dont have a whole lot of secrets from one
another. I dont think she'd say I'm crazy, but some might. Ed Tom? Yeah, they had to swear
out a lunacy warrant. I hear they're feedin him under the door. That's all right. I listen to
what she says and what she says makes good sense. I wish she'd say more of it. I can use all
the help I can get. Well, that's enough of that.
WHEN HE WALKED IN the house the phone was ringing. Sheriff Bell, he said. He made his
way to the sideboard and picked up the phone. Sheriff Bell, he said.
Sheriff this is Detective Cook with the Odessa police.
Yessir.
There's a report we have here that is flagged with your name. It has to do with a woman
named Carla Jean Moss that was murdered here back in March.
Yessir. I appreciate you callin.
They picked up the murder weapon off of the FBI ballistics database and they traced it down
to a boy here in Midland. The boy says he got the gun out of a truck at a accident scene. Just
seen it and took it. And I expect that's right. I talked to him. He sold it and it turned up in a
convenience store robbery in Shreveport Louisiana. Now the accident where he got the gun, it
took place on the same day as the murder did. The man that owned the gun left it in the truck
and disappeared and he aint been heard from since. So you can see where this is goin. We
dont get a lot of unsolved homicides up here and we damn sure dont like em. Can I ask you
what was your interest in the case, Sheriff?
Bell told him. Cook listened. Then he gave him a number. It was the investigator of the
accident. Roger Catron. Let me call him first. He'll talk to you.
That's all right, Bell said. He'll talk to me. I've known him for years.
He called the number and Catron answered.
How're you doin Ed Tom.
I aint braggin.
What can I do you for.
Bell told him about the wreck. Yessir, Catron said. Sure I remember it. There was two boys
killed in that wreck. We still aint found the driver of the other vehicle.
What happened?
Boys'd been smokin dope. They run a stopsign and hit a brand new Dodge pickup broadside.
Totaled it out. The old boy in the pickup he climbed out and just took off up the street. Fore
we got there. Truck had been bought in Mexico. Illegal. No EPA or nothin. No registration.
What about the other vehicle.
There was three boys in it. Nineteen, twenty years old. All of em Mexican. The only one lived
was the one in the back seat. Apparently they was passin around a doober and they went
through this intersection probably about sixty mile a hour and just T-boned the old boy in the
truck. The one in the passenger side of the car, he come through the windscreen head first and
crossed the street and landed on a woman's porch. She was out puttin some mail in her box
and he didnt miss her by much. She set off down the street in her housewrapper and
haircurlers just a hollerin. I dont think she's right yet.
What did you all do with the boy that took the gun?
We cut him loose.
If I come up there you reckon I could talk to him?
I'd say you could. I'm lookin at him on the screen right now.
What's his name?
David DeMarco.
Is he Mexican?
No. The boys in the car was. Not him.
Will he talk to me?
One way to find out.
I'll be there in the mornin.
I look forward to seein you.
Catron had called the boy and talked to him and when the boy walked into the cafe he didnt
seem particularly worried about anything. He slid into the booth and propped up one foot and
sucked at his teeth and looked at Bell.
You want some coffee?
Yeah. I'll take some coffee.
Bell raised a finger and the waitress came over and took his order. He looked at the boy.
What I wanted to talk to you about was the man that walked away from that wreck. I wonder
if there's anything that comes to mind about him. Anything you might remember.
The boy shook his head. Naw, he said. He looked around the room.
How bad was he hurt?
I dont know. It looked like his arm was broke.
What else.
Had a cut on his head. I couldnt say how bad he was hurt. He could walk.
Bell watched him. How old a man would you say he was?
Hell, Sheriff. I dont know. He was pretty bloody and all.
On the report you said he was maybe in his late thirties.
Yeah. Somethin like that.
Who were you with.
What?
Who were you with.
Wasnt with nobody.
The neighbor there who called in the report, he said there was two of you.
Well, he's full of it.
Yeah? I talked to him this mornin and he seemed to me to be about as unfull of it as they
come.
The waitress brought the coffee. DeMarco poured about a quarter cup of sugar into his and sat
stirring it.
You know this man had just got done killin a woman two blocks away when he got in that
wreck.
Yeah. I didnt know it at the time.
You know how many people he's killed?
I dont know nothin about him.
How tall was he would you say?
Not real tall. Sort of medium.
Was he wearin boots.
Yeah. I think he was wearin boots.
What kind of boots.
I think they might of been ostrich.
Expensive boots.
Yeah.
How badly was he bleedin?
I dont know. He was bleedin. He had a cut on his head.
What did he say?
He didnt say nothin.
What did you say to him?
Nothin. I asked him was he all right.
You think he might of died?
I got no idea.
Bell leaned back. He turned the saltcellar a half turn on the tabletop. Then he turned it back
again.
Tell me who you were with.
Wasnt with nobody.
Bell studied him. The boy sucked his teeth. He picked up the coffee mug and sipped the
coffee and set it down again.
You aint goin to help me, are you?
I done told you all I know to tell. You seen the report. That's all I know to tell you.
Bell sat watching him. Then he got up and put on his hat and left.
In the morning he went to the high school and got some names from DeMarco's teacher. The
first one he talked to wanted to know how he'd found him. He was a big kid and he sat with
his hands folded and looked down at his tennis shoes. They were about a size fourteen and
had Left and Right written on the toecaps in purple ink.
There's somethin you all aint tellin me.
The boy shook his head.
Did he threaten you?
Naw.
What did he look like? Was he Mexican?
I dont think so. He was kindly dark complected is all.
Were you afraid of him?
I wasnt till you showed up. Hell, Sheriff, I knew we shouldnt of took the damn thing. It was a
dumb-ass thing to do. I aint goin to set here and say it was David's idea even if it was. I'm big
enough to say no.
Yes you are.
It was all just weird. Them boys in the car was dead. Am I in trouble over this?
What else did he say to you.
The boy looked around the lunchroom. He looked almost in tears. If I had it to do over again
I'd do it different. I know that.
What did he say.
He said that we didnt know what he looked like. He give David a hundred dollar bill.
A hundred dollars.
Yeah. David give him his shirt. To make a sling for his arm.
Bell nodded. All right. What did he look like.
He was medium height. Medium build. Looked like he was in shape. In his mid thirties
maybe. Dark hair. Dark brown, I think. I dont know, Sheriff. He looked like anybody.
Like anybody.
The kid looked at his shoes. He looked up at Bell. He didnt look like anybody. I mean there
wasnt nothin unusual lookin about him. But he didnt look like anybody you'd want to mess
with. When he said somethin you damn sure listened. There was a bone stickin out under the
skin on his arm and he didnt pay no more attention to it than nothin.
All right.
Am I in trouble over this?
No.
I appreciate it.
You dont know where things will take you, do you?
No sir, you dont. I think I learned somethin from it. If that's any use to you.
It is. Do you think DeMarco learned anything?
The boy shook his head. I dont know, he said. I cant speak for David.
XI
I got Molly to run down his relatives and we finally found his dad in San Saba. I left to go up
there on a Friday evenin and I remember thinkin to myself when I left that this was probably
another dumb thing I was fixin to do but I went anyways. I'd done talked to him on the phone.
He didnt sound like he was waitin to see me or he wasnt waitin but he said to come on so here
I went. Checked in a motel when I got there and drove out to his house in the mornin.
His wife had died some years back. We set out on the porch and drunk iced tea and I guess
we'd of set there from now on if I hadnt of said somethin. He was a bit oldern me. Ten years
maybe. I told him what I'd come to tell him. About his boy. Told him the facts. He just set
there and nodded. He was settin in a swing and he just rocked back and forth a little and held
that glass of tea in his lap. I didnt know what else to say so I just shut up and we set there for
quite some time. And then he said, and he didnt look at me, he just looked out across the yard,
and he said: He was the best rifleshot I ever saw. Bar none. I didnt know what to say. I said:
Yessir.
He was a sniper in Vietnam you know.
I said I didnt know that.
He was not in no drug deals.
No sir. He was not.
He nodded. He wasnt raised that way, he said.
Yessir.
Was you in the war?
Yes I was. European theatre.
He nodded. Llewelyn when he come home he went to visit several families of buddies of his
that had not made it back. He give it up. He didnt know what to say to em. He said he could
see em settin there lookin at him and wishin he was dead. You could see it in their faces. In
the place of their own loved one, you understand.
Yessir. I can understand that.
I can too. But aside from that they'd all done things over there that they'd just as soon left
over there. We didnt have nothin like that in the war. Or very little of it. He smacked the tar
out of one or two of them hippies. Spittin on him. Callin him a babykiller. A lot of them boys
that come back, they're still havin problems. I thought it was because they didnt have the
country behind em. But I think it might be worse than that even. The country they did have
was in pieces. It still is. It wasnt the hippies' fault. It wasnt the fault of them boys that got sent
over there neither. Eighteen, nineteen year old.
He turned and looked at me. And then I thought he looked a lot older. His eyes looked old. He
said: People will tell you it was Vietnam brought this country to its knees. But I never
believed that. It was already in bad shape. Vietnam was just the icin on the cake. We didnt
have nothin to give to em to take over there. If we'd sent em without rifles I dont know as
they'd of been all that much worse off. You cant go to war like that. You cant go to war
without God. I dont know what is goin to happen when the next one comes. I surely dont.
And that was pretty much all that was said. I thanked him for his time. The next day was goin
to be my last day in the office and I had a good deal to think about. I drove back to I-10 along
the back roads. Drove down to Cherokee and took 501. I tried to put things in perspective but
sometimes you're just too close to it. It's a life's work to see yourself for what you really are
and even then you might be wrong. And that is somethin I dont want to be wrong about. I've
thought about why it was I wanted to be a lawman. There was always some part of me that
wanted to be in charge. Pretty much insisted on it. Wanted people to listen to what I had to
say. But there was apart of me too that just wanted to pull everbody back in the boat. If I've
tried to cultivate anything it's been that. I think we are all of us ill prepared for what is to
come and I dont care what shape it takes. And whatever comes my guess is that it will have
small power to sustain us. These old people I talk to, if you could of told em that there would
be people on the streets of our Texas towns with green hair and bones in their noses speakin a
language they couldnt even understand, well, they just flat out wouldnt of believed you. But
what if you'd of told em it was their own grandchildren? Well, all of that is signs and wonders
but it dont tell you how it got that way. And it dont tell you nothin about how it's fixin to get,
neither. Part of it was I always thought I could at least someway put things right and I guess I
just dont feel that way no more. I dont know what I do feel like. I feel like them old people I
was talkin about. Which aint goin to get better neither. I'm bein asked to stand for somethin
that I dont have the same belief in it I once did. Asked to believe in somethin I might not hold
with the way I once did. That's the problem. I failed at it even when I did. Now I've seen it
held to the light. Seen any number of believers fall away. I've been forced to look at it again
and I've been forced to look at myself. For better or for worse I do not know. I dont know that
I would even advise you to throw in with me, and I never had them sorts of doubts before. If
I'm wiser in the ways of the world it come at a price. Pretty good price too. When I told her I
was quittin she at first didnt take me to mean it literally but I told her I did so mean it. I told
her I hoped the people of this county would have better sense than to even vote for me. I told
her I didnt feel right takin their money. She said well you dont mean that and I told her I
meant it ever word. We're six thousand dollars in debt over this job too and I dont know what
I'm goin to do about that either. Well we just set there for a time. I didnt think it would upset
her like it done. Finally I just said: Loretta, I cant do it no more. And she smiled and she said:
You aim to quit while you're ahead? And I said no mam I just aim to quit. I aint ahead by a
damn sight. I never will be. One other thing and then I'll shut up. I would just as soon that it
hadnt of got told but they put it in the papers. I went up to Ozona and talked to the district
attorney up there and they said I could talk to that Mexicans lawyer if I wanted and maybe
testify at the trial but that was all they would do. Meanin that they wouldnt do nothin. So I
wound up doin that and of course it didnt come to nothin and the old boy got the death
penalty. So I went up to Huntsville to see him and here is what happened. I walked in there
and set down and he of course knew who I was as he had seen me at the trial and all and he
said: What did you bring me? And I said I didnt bring him nothin and he said well he thought
I must of brung him somethin. Some candy or somethin. Said he figured I was sweet on him. I
looked at the guard and the guard looked away. I looked at this man. Mexican, maybe thirtyfive,
forty year old. Spoke good english. I said to him that I didnt come up there to be insulted
but I just wanted him to know that I done the best I could for him and that I was sorry because
I didnt think he done it and he just rared back and laughed and he said: Where do they find
somebody like you? Have they got you in diapers yet? I shot that son of a bitch right between
the eyes and drug him back to his car by the hair of the head and set the car on fire and
burned him to grease.
Well. These people can read you pretty good. If I had of smacked him in the mouth that guard
would not of said word one. And he knew that. He knew that.
I seen that county prosecutor comin out of there and I knowed him just a little to talk to and
we stopped and visited some. I didnt tell him what had happened but he knew about me tryin
to help that man and he might could of put two and two together. I dont know. He didnt ask
me nothin about him. Didnt ask me what I was doin up there or nothin. There's two kinds of
people that dont ask a lot of questions. One is too dumb to and the other dont need to. I'll
leave it to you to guess which one I figure him to be. He was just standin there in the hall with
his briefcase. Like he had all the time in the world. He told me that when he got out of law
school he had been a defense attorney for a while. He said it made his life too complicated.
He didnt want to spend the rest of his life bein lied to on a daily basis just as a matter of
course. I told him that a lawyer one time told me that in law school they try and teach you not
to worry about right and wrong but just follow the law and I said I wasnt so sure about that.
He thought about that and he nodded and he said that he pretty much had to agree with that
lawyer. He said that if you dont follow the law right and wrong wont save you. Which I guess
I can see the sense of But it dont change the way I think. Finally I asked him if he knew who
Mammon was. And he said: Mammon?
Yes. Mammon.
You mean like in God and Mammon?
Yessir.
Well, he said, I cant say as I do. I know it's in the bible. Is it the devil?
I dont know. I'm goin to look it up. I got a feelin I ought to know who it is.
He kindly smiled and he said: You sound like he might be getting ready to take up the spare
bedroom.
Well, I said, that would be one concern. In any case I feel I need to familiarize myself with his
habits.
He nodded. Kind of smiled. Then he did ask me a question. He said: This mystery man you
think killed that trooper and burned him up in his car. What do you know about him?
I dont know nothin. I wish I did. Or I think I wish it.
Yeah.
He's pretty much a ghost.
Is he pretty much or is he one?
No, he's out there. I wish he wasnt. But he is.
He nodded. I guess if he was a ghost you wouldnt have to worry about him.
I said that was right, but I've thought about it since and I think the answer to his question is
that when you encounter certain things in the world, the evidence for certain things, you
realize that you have come upon somethin that you may very well not be equal to and I think
that this is one of them things. When you've said that it's real and not just in your head I'm not
all that sure what it is you have said.
Loretta did say one thing. She said somethin to the effect that it wasnt my fault and I said it
was. And I had thought about that too. I told her that if you got a bad enough dog in your
yard people will stay out of it. And they didnt.
WHEN HE GOT HOME she wasnt there but her car was. He walked out to the barn and her
horse was gone. He started to go back to the house but then he stopped and he thought about
her maybe being hurt and he went to the tackroom and got his saddle down and carried it out
into the bay and whistled at his horse and watched his head come up over the stall door down
at the end of the barn with his ears scissoring.
He rode out with the reins in one hand, patting the horse. He talked to the horse as he went.
Feels good to be out, dont it. You know where they went? That's all right. Dont you worry
about it. We'll find em.
Forty minutes later he saw her and stopped and sat the horse and watched. She was riding
along a red dirt ridge to the south sitting with her hands crossed on the pommel, looking
toward the last of the sun, the horse slogging slowly through the loose sandy dirt, the red stain
of it following them in the still air. That's my heart yonder, he told the horse. It always was.
They rode together out to Warner's Well and dismounted and sat under the cottonwoods while
the horses grazed. Doves coming in to the tanks. Late in the year. We wont be seein them
much longer.
She smiled. Late in the year, she said.
You hate it.
Leavin here?
Leavin here.
I'm all right.
Because of me though, aint it?
She smiled. Well, she said, past a certain age I dont guess there is any such thing as good
change.
I guess we're in trouble then.
We'll be all right. I think I'm goin to like havin you home for dinner.
I like bein home any time.
I remember when Daddy retired Mama told him: I said for better or for worse but I didnt say
nothin about lunch.
Bell smiled. I'll bet she wishes he could come home now.
I'll bet she does too. I'll bet I do, for that matter.
I shouldnt ought to of said that.
You didnt say nothin wrong.
You'd say that anyways.
That's my job.
Bell smiled. You wouldnt tell me if I was in the wrong?
Nope.
What if I wanted you to?
Tough.
He watched the little brindled desert doves come stooping in under the dull rose light. Is that
true? he said.
Pretty much. Not altogether.
Is that a good idea?
Well, she said. Whatever it was I expect you'd get it figured out with no help from me. And if
it was somethin we just disagreed about I reckon I'd get over it.
Where I might not.
She smiled and put her hand on his. Put it up, she said. It's nice just to be here.
Yes mam. It is indeed.
XII
I'LL WAKE LORETTA UP just bein awake myself. Be layin there and she'll say my name.
Like askin me if I'm there. Sometimes I'll go in the kitchen and get her a ginger ale and we'll
set there in the dark. I wish I had her ease about things. The world I've seen has not made me
a spiritual person. Not like her. She worries about me, too. I see it. I reckon I thought that
because I was older and the man that she would learn from me and in many respects she has.
But I know where the debt lies.
I think I know where we're headed. We're bein bought with our own money. And it aint just
the drugs. There is fortunes bein accumulated out there that they dont nobody even know
about. What do we think is goin to come of that money? Money that can buy whole countries.
It done has. Can it buy this one? I dont think so. But it will put you in bed with people you
ought not to be there with. It's not even a law enforcement problem. I doubt that it ever was.
There's always been narcotics. But people dont just up and decide to dope theirselves for no
reason. By the millions. I dont have no answer about that. In particular I dont have no answer
to take heart from. I told a reporter here a while back  young girl, seemed nice enough. She
was just tryin to be a reporter. She said: Sheriff how come you to let crime get so out of hand
in your county? Sounded like a fair question I reckon. Maybe it was a fair question. Anyway I
told her, I said: It starts when you begin to overlook bad manners. Any time you quit hearin
Sir and Mam the end is pretty much in sight. I told her, I said: It reaches into ever strata.
You've heard about that aint you? Ever strata? You finally get into the sort of breakdown in
mercantile ethics that leaves people settin around out in the desert dead in their vehicles and
by then it's just too late.
She give me kindly a funny look. So the last thing I told her, and maybe I shouldnt of said it, I
told her that you cant have a dope business without dopers. A lot of em are well dressed and
holdin down goodpayin jobs too. I said: You might even know some yourself
The other thing is the old people, and I keep comin back to them. They look at me it's always a
question. Years back I dont remember that. I dont remember it when I was sheriff back in the
fifties. You see em and they dont even look confused. They just look crazy. That bothers me.
It's like they woke up and they dont know how they got where they're at. Well, in a manner of
speakin they dont.
At supper this evenin she told me she'd been readin St John. The Revelations. Any time I get to
talkin about how things are she'll find somethin in the bible so I asked her if Revelations had
anything to say about the shape things was takin and she said she'd let me know. I asked her if
there was anything in there about green hair and nosebones and she said not in so many
words there wasnt. I dont know if that's a good sign or not. Then she come around behind my
chair and put her arms around my neck and bit me on the ear. She's a very young woman in a
lot of ways. If I didnt have her I dont know what I would have. Well, yes I do. You wouldnt
need a box to put it in, neither.
It was a cold blustery day when he walked out of the courthouse for the last time. Some men
could put their arms around a crying woman but it never felt natural to him. He walked down
the steps and out the back door and got in his truck and sat there. He couldnt name the feeling.
It was sadness but it was something else besides. And the something else besides was what
had him sitting there instead of starting the truck. He'd felt like this before but not in a long
time and when he said that, then he knew what it was. It was defeat. It was being beaten.
More bitter to him than death. You need to get over that, he said. Then he started the truck.
XIII
Where you went out the back door of that house there was a stone water trough in the weeds
by the side of the house. A galvanized pipe come off the roof and the trough stayed pretty
much full and I remember stoppin there one time and squattin down and lookin at it and I got
to thinkin about it. I dont know how long it had been there. A hundred years. Two hundred.
You could see the chisel marks in the stone. It was hewed out of solid rock and it was about
six foot long and maybe a foot and a half wide and about that deep. Just chiseled out of the
rock. And I got to thinkin about the man that done that. That country had not had a time of
peace much of any length at all that I knew of. I've read a little of the history of it since and I
aint sure it ever had one. But this man had set down with a hammer and chisel and carved out
a stone water trough to last ten thousand years. Why was that? What was it that he had faith
in? It wasnt that nothin would change. Which is what you might think, I suppose. He had to
know bettern that. I've thought about it a good deal. I thought about it after I left there with
that house blown to pieces. I'm goin to say that water trough is there yet. It would of took
somethin to move it, I can tell you that. So I think about him settin there with his hammer and
his chisel, maybe just a hour or two after supper, I dont know. And I have to say that the only
thing I can think is that there was some sort of promise in his heart. And I dont have no
intentions of carvin a stone water trough. But I would like to be able to make that kind of
promise. I think that's what I would like most of all.
The other thing is that I have not said much about my father and I know I have not done him
justice. I've been older now than he ever was for almost twenty years so in a sense I'm lookin
back at a younger man. He went on the road tradin horses when he was not much more than a
boy. He told me the first time or two he got skinned pretty good but he learned. He said this
trader one time he put his arm around him and he looked down at him and he told him, said:
Son, I'm goin to trade with you like you didnt even have a horse. Point bein some people will
actually tell you what it is they aim to do to you and whenever they do you might want to
listen. That stuck with me. He knew about horses and he was good with em. I've seen him
break a few and he knew what he was doin. Very easy on the horse. Talked to em a lot. He
never broke nothin in me and I owe him more than I would of thought. As the world might
look at it I suppose I was a better man. Bad as that sounds to say. Bad as that is to say. That
has got to of been hard to live with. Let alone his daddy. He would never of made a lawman.
He went to college I think two years but he never did finish. I've thought about him a lot less
than I should of and I know that aint right neither. I had two dreams about him after he died. I
dont remember the first one all that well but it was about meetin him in town somewheres and
he give me some money and I think I lost it. But the second one it was like we was both back
in older times and I was on horseback goin through the mountains of a night. Goin through
this pass in the mountains. It was cold and there was snow on the ground and he rode past me
and kept on goin. Never said nothin. He just rode on past and he had this blanket wrapped
around him and he had his head down and when he rode past I seen he was carryin fire in a
horn the way people used to do and I could see the horn from the light inside of it. About the
color of the moon. And in the dream I knew that he was goin on ahead and that he was fixin to
make afire somewhere out there in all that dark and all that cold and I knew that whenever I
got there he would be there. And then I woke up.

Eat Pray Love

 I wish Giovanni would kiss me.
Oh, but there are so many reasons why this would be a terrible idea. To begin with, Giovanni
is ten years younger than I am, andlike most Italian guys in their twentieshe still
lives with his mother. These facts alone make him an unlikely romantic partner for me, given
that I am a professional American woman in my mid-thirties, who has just come through a
failed marriage and a devastating, interminable divorce, followed immediately by a passionate
love affair that ended in sickening heartbreak. This loss upon loss has left me feeling sad and
brittle and about seven thousand years old. Purely as a matter of principle I wouldnt inflict my
sorry, busted-up old self on the lovely, unsullied Giovanni. Not to mention that I have finally
arrived at that age where a woman starts to question whether the wisest way to get over the
loss of one beautiful brown-eyed young man is indeed to promptly invite another one into her
bed. This is why I have been alone for many months now. This is why, in fact, I have decided
to spend this entire year in celibacy.
To which the savvy observer might inquire: Then why did you come to Italy?
To which I can only replyespecially when looking across the table at handsome GiovanniExcellent
question.
Giovanni is my Tandem Exchange Partner. That sounds like an innuendo, but unfortunately
its not. All it really means is that we meet a few evenings a week here in Rome to
practice each others languages. We speak first in Italian, and he is patient with me; then we
speak in English, and I am patient with him. I discovered Giovanni a few weeks after Id arrived
in Rome, thanks to that big Internet caf at the Piazza Barbarini, across the street from
that fountain with the sculpture of that sexy merman blowing into his conch shell. He
(Giovanni, that isnot the merman) had posted a flier on the bulletin board explaining that a
native Italian speaker was seeking a native English speaker for conversational language practice.
Right beside his appeal was another flier with the same request, word-for-word identical
in every way, right down to the typeface. The only difference was the contact information. One
flier listed an e-mail address for somebody named Giovanni; the other introduced somebody
named Dario. But even the home phone number was the same.
Using my keen intuitive powers, I e-mailed both men at the same time, asking in Italian,
Are you perhaps brothers?
It was Giovanni who wrote back this very provocativo message: Even better. Twins!
Yesmuch better. Tall, dark and handsome identical twenty-five-year-old twins, as it
turned out, with those giant brown liquid-center Italian eyes that just unstitch me. After meeting
the boys in person, I began to wonder if perhaps I should adjust my rule somewhat about
remaining celibate this year. For instance, perhaps I could remain totally celibate except for
keeping a pair of handsome twenty-five-year-old Italian twin brothers as lovers. Which was
slightly reminiscent of a friend of mine who is vegetarian except for bacon, but nonetheless . .
. I was already composing my letter to Penthouse:
 In the flickering, candlelit shadows of the Roman caf, it was impossible to tell whose
hands were caress

But, no.
No and no.
I chopped the fantasy off in mid-word. This was not my moment to be seeking romance
and (as day follows night) to further complicate my already knotty life. This was my moment to
look for the kind of healing and peace that can only come from solitude.
Anyway, by now, by the middle of November, the shy, studious Giovanni and I have become
dear buddies. As for Dariothe more razzle-dazzle swinger brother of the twoI have
introduced him to my adorable little Swedish friend Sofie, and how theyve been sharing their
evenings in Rome is another kind of Tandem Exchange altogether. But Giovanni and I, we
only talk. Well, we eat and we talk. We have been eating and talking for many pleasant weeks
now, sharing pizzas and gentle grammatical corrections, and tonight has been no exception.
A lovely evening of new idioms and fresh mozzarella.
Now it is midnight and foggy, and Giovanni is walking me home to my apartment through
these back streets of Rome, which meander organically around the ancient buildings like bayou
streams snaking around shadowy clumps of cypress groves. Now we are at my door. We
face each other. He gives me a warm hug. This is an improvement; for the first few weeks, he
would only shake my hand. I think if I were to stay in Italy for another three years, he might
actually get up the juice to kiss me. On the other hand, he might just kiss me right now, tonight,
right here by my door . . . theres still a chance . . . I mean were pressed up against
each others bodies beneath this moonlight . . . and of course it would be a terrible mistake . .
. but its still such a wonderful possibility that he might actually do it right now . . . that he
might just bend down . . . and . . . and . . .
Nope.
He separates himself from the embrace.
Good night, my dear Liz, he says.
 Buona notte, caro mio, I reply.
I walk up the stairs to my fourth-floor apartment, all alone. I let myself into my tiny little studio,
all alone. I shut the door behind me. Another solitary bedtime in Rome. Another long
nights sleep ahead of me, with nobody and nothing in my bed except a pile of Italian phrasebooks
and dictionaries.
I am alone, I am all alone, I am completely alone.
Grasping this reality, I let go of my bag, drop to my knees and press my forehead against
the floor. There, I offer up to the universe a fervent prayer of thanks.
First in English.
Then in Italian.
And thenjust to get the point acrossin Sanskrit.
Eat, Pray, Love

 2


 And since I am already down there in supplication on the floor, let me hold that position as I
reach back in time three years earlier to the moment when this entire story begana moment
which also found me in this exact same posture: on my knees, on a floor, praying.
Everything else about the three-years-ago scene was different, though. That time, I was
not in Rome but in the upstairs bathroom of the big house in the suburbs of New York which
Id recently purchased with my husband. It was a cold November, around three oclock in the
morning. My husband was sleeping in our bed. I was hiding in the bathroom for something
like the forty-seventh consecutive night, andjust as during all those nights beforeI was
sobbing. Sobbing so hard, in fact, that a great lake of tears and snot was spreading before me
on the bathroom tiles, a veritable Lake Inferior (if you will) of all my shame and fear and confusion
and grief.
 I dont want to be married anymore.

I was trying so hard not to know this, but the truth kept insisting itself to me.
 I dont want to be married anymore. I dont want to live in this big house. I dont want to
have a baby.

But I was supposed to want to have a baby. I was thirty-one years old. My husband and
Iwho had been together for eight years, married for sixhad built our entire life around the
common expectation that, after passing the doddering old age of thirty, I would want to settle
down and have children. By then, we mutually anticipated, I would have grown weary of traveling
and would be happy to live in a big, busy household full of children and homemade
quilts, with a garden in the backyard and a cozy stew bubbling on the stovetop. (The fact that
this was a fairly accurate portrait of my own mother is a quick indicator of how difficult it once
was for me to tell the difference between myself and the powerful woman who had raised
me.) But I didntas I was appalled to be finding outwant any of these things. Instead, as
my twenties had come to a close, that deadline of THIRTY had loomed over me like a death
sentence, and I discovered that I did not want to be pregnant. I kept waiting to want to have a
baby, but it didnt happen. And I know what it feels like to want something, believe me. I well
know what desire feels like. But it wasnt there. Moreover, I couldnt stop thinking about what
my sister had said to me once, as she was breastfeeding her firstborn: Having a baby is like
getting a tattoo on your face. You really need to be certain its what you want before you commit.
How could I turn back now, though? Everything was in place. This was supposed to be the
year. In fact, wed been trying to get pregnant for a few months already. But nothing had
happened (aside from the fact thatin an almost sarcastic mockery of pregnancyI was experiencing
psychosomatic morning sickness, nervously throwing up my breakfast every day).
And every month when I got my period I would find myself whispering furtively in the bathroom:
Thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you for giving me one more month to live . . .
Id been attempting to convince myself that this was normal. All women must feel this way
when theyre trying to get pregnant, Id decided. (Ambivalent was the word I used, avoiding
the much more accurate description: utterly consumed with dread.) I was trying to convince
myself that my feelings were customary, despite all evidence to the contrarysuch as the acquaintance
Id run into last week whod just discovered that she was pregnant for the first
time, after spending two years and a kings ransom in fertility treatments. She was ecstatic.
She had wanted to be a mother forever, she told me. She admitted shed been secretly buying
baby clothes for years and hiding them under the bed, where her husband wouldnt find
them. I saw the joy in her face and I recognized it. This was the exact joy my own face had radiated
last spring, the day I discovered that the magazine I worked for was going to send me
on assignment to New Zealand, to write an article about the search for giant squid. And I
thought, Until I can feel as ecstatic about having a baby as I felt about going to New Zealand
to search for a giant squid, I cannot have a baby.
 I dont want to be married anymore.

In daylight hours, I refused that thought, but at night it would consume me. What a catastrophe.
How could I be such a criminal jerk as to proceed this deep into a marriage, only to
leave it? Wed only just bought this house a year ago. Hadnt I wanted this nice house?
Hadnt I loved it? So why was I haunting its halls every night now, howling like Medea?
Wasnt I proud of all wed accumulatedthe prestigious home in the Hudson Valley, the
apartment in Manhattan, the eight phone lines, the friends and the picnics and the parties, the
weekends spent roaming the aisles of some box-shaped superstore of our choice, buying
ever more appliances on credit? I had actively participated in every moment of the creation of
this lifeso why did I feel like none of it resembled me? Why did I feel so overwhelmed with
duty, tired of being the primary breadwinner and the housekeeper and the social coordinator
and the dog-walker and the wife and the soon-to-be mother, andsomewhere in my stolen
momentsa writer . . .?
 I dont want to be married anymore.

My husband was sleeping in the other room, in our bed. I equal parts loved him and could
not stand him. I couldnt wake him to share in my distresswhat would be the point? Hed
already been watching me fall apart for months now, watching me behave like a madwoman
(we both agreed on that word), and I only exhausted him. We both knew there was something
wrong with me, and hed been losing patience with it. Wed been fighting and crying, and we
were weary in that way that only a couple whose marriage is collapsing can be weary. We
had the eyes of refugees.
The many reasons I didnt want to be this mans wife anymore are too personal and too
sad to share here. Much of it had to do with my problems, but a good portion of our troubles
were related to his issues, as well. Thats only natural; there are always two figures in a marriage,
after alltwo votes, two opinions, two conflicting sets of decisions, desires and limitations.
But I dont think its appropriate for me to discuss his issues in my book. Nor would I ask
anyone to believe that I am capable of reporting an unbiased version of our story, and therefore
the chronicle of our marriages failure will remain untold here. I also will not discuss here
all the reasons why I did still want to be his wife, or all his wonderfulness, or why I loved him
and why I had married him and why I was unable to imagine life without him. I wont open any
of that. Let it be sufficient to say that, on this night, he was still my lighthouse and my albatross
in equal measure. The only thing more unthinkable than leaving was staying; the only
thing more impossible than staying was leaving. I didnt want to destroy anything or anybody.
I just wanted to slip quietly out the back door, without causing any fuss or consequences, and
then not stop running until I reached Greenland.
This part of my story is not a happy one, I know. But I share it here because something
was about to occur on that bathroom floor that would change forever the progression of my
lifealmost like one of those crazy astronomical super-events when a planet flips over in outer
space for no reason whatsoever, and its molten core shifts, relocating its poles and altering
its shape radically, such that the whole mass of the planet suddenly becomes oblong instead
of spherical. Something like that.
What happened was that I started to pray.
You knowlike, to God.
Eat, Pray, Love

 3


 Now, this was a first for me. And since this is the first time I have introduced that loaded
wordGODinto my book, and since this is a word which will appear many times again
throughout these pages, it seems only fair that I pause here for a moment to explain exactly
what I mean when I say that word, just so people can decide right away how offended they
need to get.
Saving for later the argument about whether God exists at all (noheres a better idea:
lets skip that argument completely), let me first explain why I use the word God, when I could
just as easily use the words Jehovah, Allah, Shiva, Brahma, Vishnu or Zeus. Alternatively, I
could call God That, which is how the ancient Sanskrit scriptures say it, and which I think
comes close to the all-inclusive and unspeakable entity I have sometimes experienced. But
that That feels impersonal to mea thing, not a beingand I myself cannot pray to a That. I
need a proper name, in order to fully sense a personal attendance. For this same reason,
when I pray, I do not address my prayers to The Universe, The Great Void, The Force, The
Supreme Self, The Whole, The Creator, The Light, The Higher Power, or even the most poetic
manifestation of Gods name, taken, I believe, from the Gnostic gospels: The Shadow of
the Turning.
I have nothing against any of these terms. I feel they are all equal because they are all
equally adequate and inadequate descriptions of the indescribable. But we each do need a
functional name for this indescribability, and God is the name that feels the most warm to
me, so thats what I use. I should also confess that I generally refer to God as Him, which
doesnt bother me because, to my mind, its just a convenient personalizing pronoun, not a
precise anatomical description or a cause for revolution. Of course, I dont mind if people call
God Her, and I understand the urge to do so. Againto me, these are both equal terms,
equally adequate and inadequate. Though I do think the capitalization of either pronoun is a
nice touch, a small politeness in the presence of the divine.
Culturally, though not theologically, Im a Christian. I was born a Protestant of the white
Anglo-Saxon persuasion. And while I do love that great teacher of peace who was called Jesus,
and while I do reserve the right to ask myself in certain trying situations what indeed He
would do, I cant swallow that one fixed rule of Christianity insisting that Christ is the only path
to God. Strictly speaking, then, I cannot call myself a Christian. Most of the Christians I know
accept my feelings on this with grace and open-mindedness. Then again, most of the Christians
I know dont speak very strictly. To those who do speak (and think) strictly, all I can do
here is offer my regrets for any hurt feelings and now excuse myself from their business.
Traditionally, I have responded to the transcendent mystics of all religions. I have always
responded with breathless excitement to anyone who has ever said that God does not live in
a dogmatic scripture or in a distant throne in the sky, but instead abides very close to us indeedmuch
closer than we can imagine, breathing right through our own hearts. I respond
with gratitude to anyone who has ever voyaged to the center of that heart, and who has then
returned to the world with a report for the rest of us that God is an experience of supreme
love. In every religious tradition on earth, there have always been mystical saints and transcendents
who report exactly this experience. Unfortunately many of them have ended up arrested
and killed. Still, I think very highly of them.
In the end, what I have come to believe about God is simple. Its like thisI used to have
this really great dog. She came from the pound. She was a mixture of about ten different
breeds, but seemed to have inherited the finest features of them all. She was brown. When
people asked me, What kind of dog is that? I would always give the same answer: Shes a
brown dog. Similarly, when the question is raised, What kind of God do you believe in? my
answer is easy: I believe in a magnificent God.
Eat, Pray, Love
 4


 Of course, Ive had a lot of time to formulate my opinions about divinity since that night on
the bathroom floor when I spoke to God directly for the first time. In the middle of that dark
November crisis, though, I was not interested in formulating my views on theology. I was interested
only in saving my life. I had finally noticed that I seemed to have reached a state of
hopeless and life-threatening despair, and it occurred to me that sometimes people in this
state will approach God for help. I think Id read that in a book somewhere.
What I said to God through my gasping sobs was something like this: Hello, God. How
are you? Im Liz. Its nice to meet you.
Thats rightI was speaking to the creator of the universe as though wed just been introduced
at a cocktail party. But we work with what we know in this life, and these are the words
I always use at the beginning of a relationship. In fact, it was all I could do to stop myself from
saying, Ive always been a big fan of your work . . .
Im sorry to bother you so late at night, I continued. But Im in serious trouble. And Im
sorry I havent ever spoken directly to you before, but I do hope I have always expressed
ample gratitude for all the blessings that youve given me in my life.
This thought caused me to sob even harder. God waited me out. I pulled myself together
enough to go on: I am not an expert at praying, as you know. But can you please help me? I
am in desperate need of help. I dont know what to do. I need an answer. Please tell me what
to do. Please tell me what to do. Please tell me what to do . . .
And so the prayer narrowed itself down to that simple entreatyPlease tell me what to
dorepeated again and again. I dont know how many times I begged. I only know that I
begged like someone who was pleading for her life. And the crying went on forever.
Untilquite abruptlyit stopped.
Quite abruptly, I found that I was not crying anymore. Id stopped crying, in fact, in midsob.
My misery had been completely vacuumed out of me. I lifted my forehead off the floor
and sat up in surprise, wondering if I would see now some Great Being who had taken my
weeping away. But nobody was there. I was just alone. But not really alone, either. I was surrounded
by something I can only describe as a little pocket of silencea silence so rare that I
didnt want to exhale, for fear of scaring it off. I was seamlessly still. I dont know when Id
ever felt such stillness.
Then I heard a voice. Please dont be alarmedit was not an Old Testament Hollywood
Charlton Heston voice, nor was it a voice telling me I must build a baseball field in my backyard.
It was merely my own voice, speaking from within my own self. But this was my voice as
I had never heard it before. This was my voice, but perfectly wise, calm and compassionate.
This was what my voice would sound like if Id only ever experienced love and certainty in my
life. How can I describe the warmth of affection in that voice, as it gave me the answer that
would forever seal my faith in the divine?
The voice said: Go back to bed, Liz.
I exhaled.
It was so immediately clear that this was the only thing to do. I would not have accepted
any other answer. I would not have trusted a great booming voice that said either: You Must
Divorce Your Husband! or You Must Not Divorce Your Husband! Because thats not true wisdom.
True wisdom gives the only possible answer at any given moment, and that night, going
back to bed was the only possible answer. Go back to bed, said this omniscient interior voice,
because you dont need to know the final answer right now, at three oclock in the morning on
a Thursday in November. Go back to bed, because I love you. Go back to bed, because the
only thing you need to do for now is get some rest and take good care of yourself until you do
know the answer. Go back to bed so that, when the tempest comes, youll be strong enough
to deal with it. And the tempest is coming, dear one. Very soon. But not tonight. Therefore:
 Go back to bed, Liz.

In a way, this little episode had all the hallmarks of a typical Christian conversion experiencethe
dark night of the soul, the call for help, the responding voice, the sense of transformation.
But I would not say that this was a religious conversion for me, not in that traditional
manner of being born again or saved. Instead, I would call what happened that night the
beginning of a religious conversation. The first words of an open and exploratory dialogue that
would, ultimately, bring me very close to God, indeed.
Eat, Pray, Love

 5


 If Id had any way of knowing that things wereas Lily Tomlin once saidgoing to get a
whole lot worse before they got worse, Im not sure how well I would have slept that night. But
seven very difficult months later, I did leave my husband. When I finally made that decision, I
thought the worst of it was over. This only shows how little I knew about divorce.
There was once a cartoon in The New Yorker magazine. Two women talking, one saying
to the other: If you really want to get to know someone, you have to divorce him. Of course,
my experience was the opposite. I would say that if you really want to STOP knowing
someone, you have to divorce him. Or her. Because this is what happened between me and
my husband. I believe that we shocked each other by how swiftly we went from being the
people who knew each other best in the world to being a pair of the most mutually incomprehensible
strangers who ever lived. At the bottom of that strangeness was the abysmal fact
that we were both doing something the other person would never have conceived possible;
he never dreamed I would actually leave him, and I never in my wildest imagination thought
he would make it so difficult for me to go.
It was my most sincere belief when I left my husband that we could settle our practical affairs
in a few hours with a calculator, some common sense and a bit of goodwill toward the
person wed once loved. My initial suggestion was that we sell the house and divide all the assets
fifty-fifty; it never occurred to me wed proceed in any other way. He didnt find this suggestion
fair. So I upped my offer, even suggesting this different kind of fifty-fifty split: What if
he took all the assets and I took all the blame? But not even that offer would bring a settlement.
Now I was at a loss. How do you negotiate once youve offered everything? I could do
nothing now but wait for his counterproposal. My guilt at having left him forbade me from
thinking I should be allowed to keep even a dime of the money Id made in the last decade.
Moreover, my newfound spirituality made it essential to me that we not battle. So this was my
positionI would neither defend myself from him, nor would I fight him. For the longest time,
against the counsel of all who cared about me, I resisted even consulting a lawyer, because I
considered even that to be an act of war. I wanted to be all Gandhi about this. I wanted to be
all Nelson Mandela about this. Not realizing at the time that both Gandhi and Mandela were
lawyers.
Months passed. My life hung in limbo as I waited to be released, waited to see what the
terms would be. We were living separately (he had moved into our Manhattan apartment), but
nothing was resolved. Bills piled up, careers stalled, the house fell into ruin and my husbands
silences were broken only by his occasional communications reminding me what a criminal
jerk I was.
And then there was David.
All the complications and traumas of those ugly divorce years were multiplied by the
drama of Davidthe guy I fell in love with as I was taking leave of my marriage. Did I say that
I fell in love with David? What I meant to say is that I dove out of my marriage and into Davids
arms exactly the same way a cartoon circus performer dives off a high platform and into a
small cup of water, vanishing completely. I clung to David for escape from marriage as if he
were the last helicopter pulling out of Saigon. I inflicted upon him my every hope for my salvation
and happiness. And, yes, I did love him. But if I could think of a stronger word than
desperately to describe how I loved David, I would use that word here, and desperate love is
always the toughest way to do it.
I moved right in with David after I left my husband. He wasisa gorgeous young man. A
born New Yorker, an actor and writer, with those brown liquid-center Italian eyes that have always
(have I already mentioned this?) unstitched me. Street-smart, independent, vegetarian,
foulmouthed, spiritual, seductive. A rebel poet-Yogi from Yonkers. Gods own sexy rookie
shortstop. Bigger than life. Bigger than big. Or at least he was to me. The first time my best
friend Susan heard me talking about him, she took one look at the high fever in my face and
said to me, Oh my God, baby, you are in so much trouble.
David and I met because he was performing in a play based on short stories Id written.
He was playing a character I had invented, which is somewhat telling. In desperate love, its
always like this, isnt it? In desperate love, we always invent the characters of our partners,
demanding that they be what we need of them, and then feeling devastated when they refuse
to perform the role we created in the first place.
But, oh, we had such a great time together during those early months when he was still
my romantic hero and I was still his living dream. It was excitement and compatibility like Id
never imagined. We invented our own language. We went on day trips and road trips. We
hiked to the top of things, swam to the bottom of other things, planned the journeys across the
world we would take together. We had more fun waiting in line together at the Department of
Motor Vehicles than most couples have on their honey-moons. We gave each other the same
nickname, so there would be no separation between us. We made goals, vows, promises and
dinner together. He read books to me, and he did my laundry. (The first time that happened, I
called Susan to report the marvel in astonishment, like Id just seen a camel using a pay
phone. I said, A man just did my laundry! And he even hand-washed my delicates! And she
repeated: Oh my God, baby, you are in so much trouble.)
The first summer of Liz and David looked like the falling-in-love montage of every romantic
movie youve ever seen, right down to the splashing in the surf and the running hand-in-hand
through the golden meadows at twilight. At this time I was still thinking my divorce might actually
proceed gracefully, though I was giving my husband the summer off from talking about it
so we could both cool down. Anyway, it was so easy not to think about all that loss in the
midst of such happiness. Then that summer (otherwise known as the reprieve) ended.
On September 9, 2001, I met with my husband face-to-face for the last time, not realizing
that every future meeting would necessitate lawyers between us, to mediate. We had dinner
in a restaurant. I tried to talk about our separation, but all we did was fight. He let me know
that I was a liar and a traitor and that he hated me and would never speak to me again. Two
mornings later I woke up after a troubled nights sleep to find that hijacked airplanes were
crashing into the two tallest buildings of my city, as everything invincible that had once stood
together now became a smoldering avalanche of ruin. I called my husband to make sure he
was safe and we wept together over this disaster, but I did not go to him. During that week,
when everyone in New York City dropped animosity in deference to the larger tragedy at
hand, I still did not go back to my husband. Which is how we both knew it was very, very over.
Its not much of an exaggeration to say that I did not sleep again for the next four months.
I thought I had fallen to bits before, but now (in harmony with the apparent collapse of the
entire world) my life really turned to smash. I wince now to think of what I imposed on David
during those months we lived together, right after 9/11 and my separation from my husband.
Imagine his surprise to discover that the happiest, most confident woman hed ever met was
actuallywhen you got her alonea murky hole of bottomless grief. Once again, I could not
stop crying. This is when he started to retreat, and thats when I saw the other side of my passionate
romantic herothe David who was solitary as a castaway, cool to the touch, in need
of more personal space than a herd of American bison.
Davids sudden emotional back-stepping probably wouldve been a catastrophe for me
even under the best of circumstances, given that I am the planets most affectionate life-form
(something like a cross between a golden retriever and a barnacle), but this was my very
worst of circumstances. I was despondent and dependent, needing more care than an armful
of premature infant triplets. His withdrawal only made me more needy, and my neediness only
advanced his withdrawals, until soon he was retreating under fire of my weeping pleas of,
Where are you going? What happened to us?
(Dating tip: Men LOVE this.)
The fact is, I had become addicted to David (in my defense, he had fostered this, being
something of a man-fatale), and now that his attention was wavering, I was suffering the
easily foreseeable consequences. Addiction is the hallmark of every infatuation-based love
story. It all begins when the object of your adoration bestows upon you a heady, hallucinogenic
dose of something you never even dared to admit that you wantedan emotional speedball,
perhaps, of thunderous love and roiling excitement. Soon you start craving that intense
attention, with the hungry obsession of any junkie. When the drug is withheld, you promptly
turn sick, crazy and depleted (not to mention resentful of the dealer who encouraged this addiction
in the first place but who now refuses to pony up the good stuff anymoredespite the
fact that you know he has it hidden somewhere, goddamn it, because he used to give it to you
for free). Next stage finds you skinny and shaking in a corner, certain only that you would sell
your soul or rob your neighbors just to have that thing even one more time. Meanwhile, the
object of your adoration has now become repulsed by you. He looks at you like youre
someone hes never met before, much less someone he once loved with high passion. The
irony is, you can hardly blame him. I mean, check yourself out. Youre a pathetic mess, unrecognizable
even to your own eyes.
So thats it. You have now reached infatuations final destinationthe complete and merciless
devaluation of self.
The fact that I can even write calmly about this today is mighty evidence of times healing
powers, because I didnt take it well as it was happening. To be losing David right after the
failure of my marriage, and right after the terrorizing of my city, and right during the worst ugliness
of divorce (a life experience my friend Brian has compared to having a really bad car
accident every single day for about two years) . . . well, this was simply too much.
David and I continued to have our bouts of fun and compatibility during the days, but at
night, in his bed, I became the only survivor of a nuclear winter as he visibly retreated from
me, more every day, as though I were infectious. I came to fear nighttime like it was a torturers
cellar. I would lie there beside Davids beautiful, inaccessible sleeping body and I
would spin into a panic of loneliness and meticulously detailed suicidal thoughts. Every part of
my body pained me. I felt like I was some kind of primitive springloaded machine, placed under
far more tension than it had ever been built to sustain, about to blast apart at great danger
to anyone standing nearby. I imagined my body parts flying off my torso in order to escape
the volcanic core of unhappiness that had become: me. Most mornings, David would wake to
find me sleeping fitfully on the floor beside his bed, huddled on a pile of bathroom towels, like
a dog.
What happened now? he would askanother man thoroughly exhausted by me.
I think I lost something like thirty pounds during that time.
Eat, Pray, Love

 6


 Oh, but it wasnt all bad, those few years . . .
Because God never slams a door in your face without opening a box of Girl Scout cookies
(or however the old adage goes), some wonderful things did happen to me in the shadow of
all that sorrow. For one thing, I finally started learning Italian. Also, I found an Indian Guru.
Lastly, I was invited by an elderly medicine man to come and live with him in Indonesia.
Ill explain in sequence.
To begin with, things started to look up somewhat when I moved out of Davids place in
early 2002 and found an apartment of my own for the first time in my life. I couldnt afford it,
since I was still paying for that big house in the suburbs which nobody was living in anymore
and which my husband was forbidding me to sell, and I was still trying to stay on top of all my
legal and counseling fees . . . but it was vital to my survival to have a One Bedroom of my
own. I saw the apartment almost as a sanatorium, a hospice clinic for my own recovery. I
painted the walls in the warmest colors I could find and bought myself flowers every week, as
if I were visiting myself in the hospital. My sister gave me a hot water bottle as a housewarming
gift (so I wouldnt have to be all alone in a cold bed) and I slept with the thing laid against
my heart every night, as though nursing a sports injury.
David and I had broken up for good. Or maybe we hadnt. Its hard to remember now how
many times we broke up and joined up over those months. But there emerged a pattern: I
would separate from David, get my strength and confidence back, and then (attracted as always
by my strength and confidence) his passion for me would rekindle. Respectfully, soberly
and intelligently, we would discuss trying again, always with some sane new plan for minimizing
our apparent incompatibilities. We were so committed to solving this thing. Because how
could two people who were so in love not end up happily ever after? It had to work. Didnt it?
Reunited with fresh hopes, wed share a few deliriously happy days together. Or sometimes
even weeks. But eventually David would retreat from me once more and I would cling to him
(or I would cling to him and he would retreatwe never could figure out how it got triggered)
and Id end up destroyed all over again. And hed end up gone.
David was catnip and kryptonite to me.
But during those periods when we were separated, as hard as it was, I was practicing living
alone. And this experience was bringing a nascent interior shift. I was beginning to sense
thateven though my life still looked like a multi-vehicle accident on the New Jersey Turnpike
during holiday trafficI was tottering on the brink of becoming a self-governing individual.
When I wasnt feeling suicidal about my divorce, or suicidal about my drama with David, I was
actually feeling kind of delighted about all the compartments of time and space that were appearing
in my days, during which I could ask myself the radical new question: What do you
want to do, Liz?
Most of the time (still so troubled from bailing out of my marriage) I didnt even dare to answer
the question, but just thrilled privately to its existence. And when I finally started to answer,
I did so cautiously. I would only allow myself to express little baby-step wants. Like:
 I want to go to a Yoga class.

 I want to leave this party early, so I can go home and read a novel.

 I want to buy myself a new pencil box.

Then there would always be that one weird answer, same every time:
 I want to learn how to speak Italian.

For years, Id wished I could speak Italiana language I find more beautiful than
rosesbut I could never make the practical justification for studying it. Why not just bone up
on the French or Russian Id already studied years ago? Or learn to speak Spanish, the better
to help me communicate with millions of my fellow Americans? What was I going to do with
Italian? Its not like I was going to move there. It would be more practical to learn how to play
the accordion.
But why must everything always have a practical application? Id been such a diligent soldier
for yearsworking, producing, never missing a deadline, taking care of my loved ones,
my gums and my credit record, voting, etc. Is this lifetime supposed to be only about duty? In
this dark period of loss, did I need any justification for learning Italian other than that it was the
only thing I could imagine bringing me any pleasure right now? And it wasnt that outrageous
a goal, anyway, to want to study a language. Its not like I was saying, at age thirty-two, I
want to become the principal ballerina for the New York City Ballet. Studying a language is
something you can actually do. So I signed up for classes at one of those continuing education
places (otherwise known as Night School for Divorced Ladies). My friends thought this
was hilarious. My friend Nick asked, Why are you studying Italian? So thatjust in case Italy
ever invades Ethiopia again, and is actually successful this timeyou can brag about knowing
a language thats spoken in two whole countries?
But I loved it. Every word was a singing sparrow, a magic trick, a truffle for me. I would
slosh home through the rain after class, draw a hot bath, and lie there in the bubbles reading
the Italian dictionary aloud to myself, taking my mind off my divorce pressures and my
heartache. The words made me laugh in delight. I started referring to my cell phone as il mio
telefonino (my teensy little telephone). I became one of those annoying people who always
say Ciao! Only I was extra annoying, since I would always explain where the word ciao comes
from. (If you must know, its an abbreviation of a phrase used by medieval Venetians as an intimate
salutation: Sono il suo schiavo! Meaning: I am your slave!) Just speaking these words
made me feel sexy and happy. My divorce lawyer told me not to worry; she said she had one
client (Korean by heritage) who, after a yucky divorce, legally changed her name to
something Italian, just to feel sexy and happy again.
Maybe I would move to Italy, after all . . .
Eat, Pray, Love

 7


 The other notable thing that was happening during that time was the newfound adventure
of spiritual discipline. Aided and abetted, of course, by the introduction into my life of an actual
living Indian Gurufor whom I will always have David to thank. Id been introduced to my
Guru the first night I ever went to Davids apartment. I kind of fell in love with them both at the
same time. I walked into Davids apartment and saw this picture on his dresser of a radiantly
beautiful Indian woman and I asked, Whos that?
He said, That is my spiritual teacher.
My heart skipped a beat and then flat-out tripped over itself and fell on its face. Then my
heart stood up, brushed itself off, took a deep breath and announced: I want a spiritual teacher.
I literally mean that it was my heart who said this, speaking through my mouth. I felt this
weird division in myself, and my mind stepped out of my body for a moment, spun around to
face my heart in astonishment and silently asked, You DO?
 Yes, replied my heart. I do.
Then my mind asked my heart, a tad sarcastically: Since WHEN?
But I already knew the answer: Since that night on the bathroom floor.
My God, but I wanted a spiritual teacher. I immediately began constructing a fantasy of
what it would be like to have one. I imagined that this radiantly beautiful Indian woman would
come to my apartment a few evenings a week and we would sit and drink tea and talk about
divinity, and she would give me reading assignments and explain the significance of the
strange sensations I was feeling during meditation . . .
All this fantasy was quickly swept away when David told me about the international status
of this woman, about her tens of thousands of studentsmany of whom have never met her
face-to-face. Still, he said, there was a gathering here in New York City every Tuesday night
of the Gurus devotees who came together as a group to meditate and chant. David said, If
youre not too freaked out by the idea of being in a room with several hundred people chanting
Gods name in Sanskrit, you can come sometime.
I joined him the following Tuesday night. Far from being freaked out by these regular-looking
people singing to God, I instead felt my soul rise diaphanous in the wake of that
chanting. I walked home that night feeling like the air could move through me, like I was clean
linen fluttering on a clothes-line, like New York itself had become a city made of rice paperand
I was light enough to run across every rooftop. I started going to the chants every
Tuesday. Then I started meditating every morning on the ancient Sanskrit mantra the Guru
gives to all her students (the regal Om Namah Shivaya, meaning, I honor the divinity that
resides within me). Then I listened to the Guru speak in person for the first time, and her
words gave me chill bumps over my whole body, even across the skin of my face. And when I
heard she had an Ashram in India, I knew I must take myself there as quickly as possible.
Eat, Pray, Love

 8


 In the meantime, though, I had to go on this trip to Indonesia.
Which happened, again, because of a magazine assignment. Just when I was feeling particularly
sorry for myself for being broke and lonely and caged up in Divorce Internment
Camp, an editor from a womens magazine asked if she could pay to send me to Bali to write
a story about Yoga vacations. In return I asked her a series of questions, mostly along the line
of Is a bean green? and Does James Brown get down? When I got to Bali (which is, to be
brief, a very nice place) the teacher who was running the Yoga retreat asked us, While youre
all here, is there anybody who would like to go visit a ninth-generation Balinese medicine
man? (another question too obvious to even answer), and so we all went over to his house
one night.
The medicine man, as it turned out, was a small, merry-eyed, russet-colored old guy with
a mostly toothless mouth, whose resemblance in every way to the Star Wars character Yoda
cannot be exaggerated. His name was Ketut Liyer. He spoke a scattered and thoroughly entertaining
kind of English, but there was a translator available for when he got stuck on a
word.
Our Yoga teacher had told us in advance that we could each bring one question or problem
to the medicine man, and he would try to help us with our troubles. Id been thinking for
days of what to ask him. My initial ideas were so lame. Will you make my husband give me a
divorce? Will you make David be sexually attracted to me again? I was rightly ashamed of
myself for these thoughts: who travels all the way around the world to meet an ancient medicine
man in Indonesia, only to ask him to intercede in boy trouble?
So when the old man asked me in person what I really wanted, I found other, truer words.
I want to have a lasting experience of God, I told him. Sometimes I feel like I understand
the divinity of this world, but then I lose it because I get distracted by my petty desires and
fears. I want to be with God all the time. But I dont want to be a monk, or totally give up
worldly pleasures. I guess what I want to learn is how to live in this world and enjoy its delights,
but also devote myself to God.
Ketut said he could answer my question with a picture. He showed me a sketch hed
drawn once during meditation. It was an androgynous human figure, standing up, hands
clasped in prayer. But this figure had four legs, and no head. Where the head should have
been, there was only a wild foliage of ferns and flowers. There was a small, smiling face
drawn over the heart.
To find the balance you want, Ketut spoke through his translator, this is what you must
become. You must keep your feet grounded so firmly on the earth that its like you have four
legs, instead of two. That way, you can stay in the world. But you must stop looking at the
world through your head. You must look through your heart, instead. That way, you will know
God.
Then he asked if he could read my palm. I gave him my left hand and he proceeded to put
me together like a three-piece puzzle.
Youre a world traveler, he began.
Which I thought was maybe a little obvious, given that I was in Indonesia at the moment,
but I didnt force the point . . .
You have more good luck than anyone Ive ever met. You will live a long time, have many
friends, many experiences. You will see the whole world. You only have one problem in your
life. You worry too much. Always you get too emotional, too nervous. If I promise you that you
will never have any reason in your life to ever worry about anything, will you believe me?
Nervously I nodded, not believing him.
For work, you do something creative, maybe like an artist, and you get paid good money
for it. Always you will get paid good money for this thing you do. You are generous with
money, maybe too generous. Also one problem. You will lose all your money once in your life.
I think maybe it will happen soon.
I think maybe it will happen in the next six to ten months, I said, thinking about my divorce.
Ketut nodded as if to say, Yeah, that sounds about right. But dont worry, he said. After
you lose all your money, you will get it all right back again. Right away youll be fine. You will
have two marriages in your life. One short, one long. And you will have two children . . .
I waited for him to say, one short, one long, but he was suddenly silent, frowning at my
palm. Then he said, Strange . . . , which is something you never want to hear from either
your palm-reader or your dentist. He asked me to move directly under the hanging lightbulb
so he could take a better look.
I am wrong, he announced. You will only have only one child. Late in life, a daughter.
Maybe. If you decide . . . but there is something else. He frowned, then looked up, suddenly
absolutely confident: Someday soon you will come back here to Bali. You must. You will stay
here in Bali for three, maybe four months. You will be my friend. Maybe you will live here with
my family. I can practice English with you. I never had anybody to practice English with. I
think you are good with words. I think this creative work you do is something about words,
yes?
Yes! I said. Im a writer. Im a book writer!
You are a book writer from New York, he said, in agreement, in confirmation. So you will
come back here to Bali and live here and teach me English. And I will teach you everything I
know.
Then he stood up and brushed off his hands, like: Thats settled.
I said, If youre serious, mister, Im serious.
He beamed at me toothlessly and said, See you later, alligator.
Eat, Pray, Love

 9


 Now, Im the kind of person who, when a ninth-generation Indonesian medicine man tells
you that youre destined to move to Bali and live with him for four months, thinks you should
make every effort to do that. And this, finally, was how my whole idea about this year of traveling
began to gel. I absolutely needed to get myself back to Indonesia somehow, on my own
dime this time. This was evident. Though I couldnt yet imagine how to do it, given my chaotic
and disturbed life. (Not only did I still have a pricey divorce to settle, and David-troubles, I still
had a magazine job that prevented me from going anywhere for three or four months at a
time.) But I had to get back there. Didnt I? Hadnt he foretold it? Problem was, I also wanted
to go to India, to visit my Gurus Ashram, and going to India is an expensive and timeconsuming
affair, also. To make matters even more confusing, Id also been dying lately to
get over to Italy, so I could practice speaking Italian in context, but also because I was drawn
to the idea of living for a while in a culture where pleasure and beauty are revered.
All these desires seemed to be at odds with one another. Especially the Italy/India conflict.
What was more important? The part of me that wanted to eat veal in Venice? Or the part of
me that wanted to be waking up long before dawn in the austerity of an Ashram to begin a
long day of meditation and prayer? The great Sufi poet and philosopher Rumi once advised
his students to write down the three things they most wanted in life. If any item on the list
clashes with any other item, Rumi warned, you are destined for unhappiness. Better to live a
life of single-pointed focus, he taught. But what about the benefits of living harmoniously amid
extremes? What if you could somehow create an expansive enough life that you could synchronize
seemingly incongruous opposites into a worldview that excludes nothing? My truth
was exactly what Id said to the medicine man in BaliI wanted to experience both. I wanted
worldly enjoyment and divine transcendencethe dual glories of a human life. I wanted what
the Greeks called kalos kai agathos, the singular balance of the good and the beautiful. Id
been missing both during these last hard years, because both pleasure and devotion require
a stress-free space in which to flourish and Id been living in a giant trash compactor of nonstop
anxiety. As for how to balance the urge for pleasure against the longing for devotion . . .
well, surely there was a way to learn that trick. And it seemed to me, just from my short stay in
Bali, that I maybe could learn this from the Balinese. Maybe even from the medicine man himself.

 Four feet on the ground, a head full of foliage, looking at the world through the heart . . .

So I stopped trying to chooseItaly? India? or Indonesia?and eventually just admitted
that I wanted to travel to all of them. Four months in each place. A year in total. Of course this
was a slightly more ambitious dream than I want to buy myself a new pencil box. But this is
what I wanted. And I knew that I wanted to write about it. It wasnt so much that I wanted to
thoroughly explore the countries themselves; this has been done. It was more that I wanted to
thoroughly explore one aspect of myself set against the backdrop of each country, in a place
that has traditionally done that one thing very well. I wanted to explore the art of pleasure in
Italy, the art of devotion in India and, in Indonesia, the art of balancing the two. It was only
later, after admitting this dream, that I noticed the happy coincidence that all these countries
begin with the letter I. A fairly auspicious sign, it seemed, on a voyage of self-discovery.
Imagine now, if you will, all the opportunities for mockery this idea unleashed in my wiseass
friends. I wanted to go to the Three Is, did I? Then why not spend the year in Iran, Ivory
Coast and Iceland? Or even betterwhy not go on pilgrimage to the Great Tri-State I Triumvirate
of Islip, I-95 and Ikea? My friend Susan suggested that perhaps I should establish a
not-for-profit relief organization called Divorces Without Borders. But all this joking was
moot because I wasnt free to go anywhere yet. That divorcelong after Id walked out of
my marriagewas still not happening. Id started having to put legal pressure on my husband,
doing dreadful things out of my worst divorce nightmares, like serving papers and writing
damning legal accusations (required by New York State law) of his alleged mental
crueltydocuments that left no room for subtlety, no way in which to say to the judge: Hey,
listen, it was a really complicated relationship, and I made huge mistakes, too, and Im very
sorry about that, but all I want is to be allowed to leave.
(Here, I pause to offer a prayer for my gentle reader: May you never, ever, have to get a
divorce in New York.)
The spring of 2003 brought things to a boiling point. A year and a half after Id left, my husband
was finally ready to discuss terms of a settlement. Yes, he wanted cash and the house
and the lease on the Manhattan apartmenteverything Id been offering the whole while. But
he was also asking for things Id never even considered (a stake in the royalties of books Id
written during the marriage, a cut of possible future movie rights to my work, a share of my retirement
accounts, etc.) and here I had to voice my protest at last. Months of negotiations ensued
between our lawyers, a compromise of sorts inched its way toward the table and it was
starting to look like my husband might actually accept a modified deal. It would cost me
dearly, but a fight in the courts would be infinitely more expensive and time-consuming, not to
mention soul-corroding. If he signed the agreement, all I had to do was pay and walk away.
Which would be fine with me at this point. Our relationship now thoroughly ruined, with even
civility destroyed between us, all I wanted anymore was the door.
The question waswould he sign? More weeks passed as he contested more details. If
he didnt agree to this settlement, wed have to go to trial. A trial would almost certainly mean
that every remaining dime would be lost in legal fees. Worst of all, a trial would mean another
yearat leastof all this mess. So whatever my husband decided (and he still was my husband,
after all), it was going to determine yet another year of my life. Would I be traveling all
alone through Italy, India and Indonesia? Or would I be getting cross-examined somewhere in
a courtroom basement during a deposition hearing?
Every day I called my lawyer fourteen timesany news?and every day she assured me
that she was doing her best, that she would telephone immediately if the deal was signed.
The nervousness I felt during this time was something between waiting to be called into the
principals office and anticipating the results of a biopsy. Id love to report that I stayed calm
and Zen, but I didnt. Several nights, in waves of anger, I beat the life out of my couch with a
softball bat. Most of the time I was just achingly depressed.
Meanwhile, David and I had broken up again. This time, it seemed, for good. Or maybe
notwe couldnt totally let go of it. Often I was still overcome with a desire to sacrifice
everything for the love of him. Other times, I had the quite opposite instinctto put as many
continents and oceans as possible between me and this guy, in the hope of finding peace and
happiness.
I had lines in my face now, permanent incisions dug between my eyebrows, from crying
and from worry.
And in the middle of all that, a book that Id written a few years earlier was being published
in paperback and I had to go on a small publicity tour. I took my friend Iva with me for company.
Iva is my age but grew up in Beirut, Lebanon. Which means that, while I was playing
sports and auditioning for musicals in a Connecticut middle school, she was cowering in a
bomb shelter five nights out of seven, trying not to die. Im not sure how all this early exposure
to violence created somebody whos so steady now, but Iva is one of the calmest souls I
know. Moreover, shes got what I call The Bat Phone to the Universe, some kind of Iva-only,
open-round-the-clock special channel to the divine.
So we were driving across Kansas, and I was in my normal state of sweaty disarray over
this divorce dealwill he sign, will he not sign?and I said to Iva, I dont think I can endure
another year in court. I wish I could get some divine intervention here. I wish I could write a
petition to God, asking for this thing to end.
So why dont you?
I explained to Iva my personal opinions about prayer. Namely, that I dont feel comfortable
petitioning for specific things from God, because that feels to me like a kind of weakness of
faith. I dont like asking, Will you change this or that thing in my life thats difficult for me?
Becausewho knows?God might want me to be facing that particular challenge for a reason.
Instead, I feel more comfortable praying for the courage to face whatever occurs in my life
with equanimity, no matter how things turn out.
Iva listened politely, then asked, Whered you get that stupid idea?
What do you mean?
Where did you get the idea you arent allowed to petition the universe with prayer? You
are part of this universe, Liz. Youre a constituentyou have every entitlement to participate
in the actions of the universe, and to let your feelings be known. So put your opinion out
there. Make your case. Believe meit will at least be taken into consideration.
Really? All this was news to me.
Really! Listenif you were to write a petition to God right now, what would it say?
I thought for a while, then pulled out a notebook and wrote this petition:
 Dear God.

 Please intervene and help end this divorce. My husband and I have failed at our marriage
and now we are failing at our divorce. This poisonous process is bringing suffering to us and
to everyone who cares about us.

 I recognize that you are busy with wars and tragedies and much larger conflicts than the
ongoing dispute of one dysfunctional couple. But it is my understanding that the health of the
planet is affected by the health of every individual on it. As long as even two souls are locked
in conflict, the whole of the world is contaminated by it. Similarly, if even one or two souls can
be free from discord, this will increase the general health of the whole world, the way a few
healthy cells in a body can increase the general health of that body.

 It is my most humble request, then, that you help us end this conflict, so that two more
people can have the chance to become free and healthy, and so there will be just a little bit
less animosity and bitterness in a world that is already far too troubled by suffering.

 I thank you for your kind attention.

 Respectfully,

 Elizabeth M. Gilbert

I read it to Iva, and she nodded her approval.
I would sign that, she said.
I handed the petition over to her with a pen, but she was too busy driving, so she said,
No, lets say that I did just sign it. I signed it in my heart.
Thank you, Iva. I appreciate your support.
Now, who else would sign it? she asked.
My family. My mother and father. My sister.
OK, she said. They just did. Consider their names added. I actually felt them sign it.
Theyre on the list now. OKwho else would sign it? Start naming names.
So I started naming names of all the people who I thought would sign this petition. I
named all my close friends, then some family members and some people I worked with. After
each name, Iva would say with assurance, Yep. He just signed it, or She just signed it.
Sometimes she would pop in with her own signatories, like: My parents just signed it. They
raised their children during a war. They hate useless conflict. Theyd be happy to see your divorce
end.
I closed my eyes and waited for more names to come to me.
I think Bill and Hillary Clinton just signed it, I said.
I dont doubt it, she said. Listen, Lizanybody can sign this petition. Do you understand
that? Call on anyone, living or dead, and start collecting signatures.
Saint Francis of Assisi just signed it!
Of course he did! Iva smacked her hand against the steering wheel with certainty.
Now I was cooking:
Abraham Lincoln just signed it! And Gandhi, and Mandela and all the peacemakers.
Eleanor Roosevelt, Mother Teresa, Bono, Jimmy Carter, Muhammad Ali, Jackie Robinson
and the Dalai Lama . . . and my grandmother who died in 1984 and my grandmother whos
still alive . . . and my Italian teacher, and my therapist, and my agent . . . and Martin Luther
King Jr. and Katharine Hepburn . . . and Martin Scorsese (which you wouldnt necessarily expect,
but its still nice of him) . . . and my Guru, of course . . . and Joanne Woodward, and
Joan of Arc, and Ms. Carpenter, my fourth-grade teacher, and Jim Henson
The names spilled from me. They didnt stop spilling for almost an hour, as we drove
across Kansas and my petition for peace stretched into page after invisible page of supporters.
Iva kept confirmingyes, he signed it, yes, she signed itand I became filled with a
grand sense of protection, surrounded by the collective goodwill of so many mighty souls.
The list finally wound down, and my anxiety wound down with it. I was sleepy. Iva said,
Take a nap. Ill drive. I closed my eyes. One last name appeared. Michael J. Fox just
signed it, I murmured, then drifted into sleep. I dont know how long I slept, maybe only for
ten minutes, but it was deep. When I woke up, Iva was still driving. She was humming a little
song to herself. I yawned.
My cell phone rang.
I looked at that crazy little telefonino vibrating with excitement in the ashtray of the rental
car. I felt disoriented, kind of stoned from my nap, suddenly unable to remember how a telephone
works.
Go ahead, Iva said, already knowing. Answer the thing.
I picked up the phone, whispered hello.
Great news! my lawyer announced from distant New York City. He just signed it!
Eat, Pray, Love

 10


 A few weeks later, I am living in Italy.
I have quit my job, paid off my divorce settlement and legal bills, given up my house, given
up my apartment, put what belongings I had left into storage in my sisters place and packed
up two suitcases. My year of traveling has commenced. And I can actually afford to do this
because of a staggering personal miracle: in advance, my publisher has purchased the book I
shall write about my travels. It all turned out, in other words, just as the Indonesian medicine
man had predicted. I would lose all my money and it would be replaced immediatelyor at
least enough of it to buy me a year of life.
So now I am a resident of Rome. The apartment Ive found is a quiet studio in a historic
building, located just a few narrow blocks from the Spanish Steps, draped beneath the graceful
shadows of the elegant Borghese Gardens, right up the street from the Piazza del Popolo,
where the ancient Romans used to race their chariots. Of course, this district doesnt quite
have the sprawling grandeur of my old New York City neighborhood, which overlooked the
entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel, but still . . .
It will do.
Eat, Pray, Love

 11


 The first meal I ate in Rome was nothing much. Just some homemade pasta (spaghetti carbonara)
with a side order of sauted spinach and garlic. (The great romantic poet Shelley
once wrote a horrified letter to a friend in England about cuisine in Italy: Young women of
rank actually eatyou will never guess whatGARLIC!) Also, I had one artichoke, just to try
it; the Romans are awfully proud of their artichokes. Then there was a pop-surprise bonus
side order brought over by the waitress for freea serving of fried zucchini blossoms with a
soft dab of cheese in the middle (prepared so delicately that the blossoms probably didnt
even notice they werent on the vine anymore). After the spaghetti, I tried the veal. Oh, and
also I drank a bottle of house red, just for me. And ate some warm bread, with olive oil and
salt. Tiramisu for dessert.
Walking home after that meal, around 11:00 PM, I could hear noise coming from one of
the buildings on my street, something that sounded like a convention of seven-year-oldsa
birthday party, maybe? Laughter and screaming and running around. I climbed the stairs to
my apartment, lay down in my new bed and turned off the light. I waited to start crying or worrying,
since thats what usually happened to me with the lights off, but I actually felt OK. I felt
fine. I felt the early symptoms of contentment.
My weary body asked my weary mind: Was this all you needed, then?
There was no response. I was already fast asleep.
Eat, Pray, Love

 12


 In every major city in the Western World, some things are always the same. The same
African men are always selling knockoffs of the same designer handbags and sunglasses,
and the same Guatemalan musicians are always playing Id rather be a sparrow than a snail
on their bamboo windpipes. But some things are only in Rome. Like the sandwich counterman
so comfortably calling me beautiful every time we speak. You want this panino grilled
or cold, bella? Or the couples making out all over the place, like there is some contest for it,
twisting into each other on benches, stroking each others hair and crotches, nuzzling and
grinding ceaselessly . . .
And then there are the fountains. Pliny the Elder wrote once: If anyone will consider the
abundance of Romes public supply of water, for baths, cisterns, ditches, houses, gardens,
villas; and take into account the distance over which it travels, the arches reared, the mountains
pierced, the valleys spannedhe will admit that there never was anything more marvelous
in the whole world.
A few centuries later, I already have a few contenders for my favorite fountain in Rome.
One is in the Villa Borghese. In the center of this fountain is a frolicking bronze family. Dad is
a faun and Mom is a regular human woman. They have a baby who enjoys eating grapes.
Mom and Dad are in a strange positionfacing each other, grabbing each others wrists, both
of them leaning back. Its hard to tell whether they are yanking against each other in strife or
swinging around merrily, but theres lots of energy there. Either way, Junior sits perched atop
their wrists, right between them, unaffected by their merriment or strife, munching on his
bunch of grapes. His little cloven hoofs dangle below him as he eats. (He takes after his father.)
It is early September, 2003. The weather is warm and lazy. By this, my fourth day in
Rome, my shadow has still not darkened the doorway of a church or a museum, nor have I
even looked at a guidebook. But I have been walking endlessly and aimlessly, and I did finally
find a tiny little place that a friendly bus driver informed me sells The Best Gelato in Rome. Its
called Il Gelato di San Crispino. Im not sure, but I think this might translate as the ice
cream of the crispy saint. I tried a combination of the honey and the hazelnut. I came back
later that same day for the grapefruit and the melon. Then, after dinner that same night, I
walked all the way back over there one last time, just to sample a cup of the cinnamon-ginger.
Ive been trying to read through one newspaper article every day, no matter how long it
takes. I look up approximately every third word in my dictionary. Todays news was fascinating.
Hard to imagine a more dramatic headline than Obesit! I Bambini Italiani Sono i Pi
Grassi dEuropa! Good God! Obesity! The article, I think, is declaring that Italian babies are
the fattest babies in Europe! Reading on, I learn that Italian babies are significantly fatter than
German babies and very significantly fatter than French babies.(Mercifully, there was no mention
of how they measure up against American babies.) Older Italian children are dangerously
obese these days, too, says the article. (The pasta industry defended itself.) These alarming
statistics on Italian child fatness were unveiled yesterday byno need to translate hereuna
task force internazionale. It took me almost an hour to decipher this whole article. The entire
time, I was eating a pizza and listening to one of Italys children play the accordion across the
street. The kid didnt look very fat to me, but that may have been because he was a gypsy.
Im not sure if I misread the last line of the article, but it seemed there was some talk from the
government that the only way to deal with the obesity crisis in Italy was to implement a tax on
the overweight . . .? Could this be true? After a few months of eating like this, will they come
after me?
Its also important to read the newspaper every day to see how the pope is doing. Here in
Rome, the popes health is recorded daily in the newspaper, very much like weather, or the
TV schedule. Today the pope is tired. Yesterday, the pope was less tired than he is today. Tomorrow,
we expect that the pope will not be quite so tired as he was today.
Its kind of a fairyland of language for me here. For someone who has always wanted to
speak Italian, what could be better than Rome? Its like somebody invented a city just to suit
my specifications, where everyone (even the children, even the taxi drivers, even the actors
on the commercials!) speaks this magical language. Its like the whole society is conspiring to
teach me Italian. Theyll even print their newspapers in Italian while Im here; they dont mind!
They have bookstores here that only sell books written in Italian! I found such a bookstore
yesterday morning and felt Id entered an enchanted palace. Everything was in Italianeven
Dr. Seuss. I wandered through, touching all the books, hoping that anyone watching me might
think I was a native speaker. Oh, how I want Italian to open itself up to me! This feeling reminded
me of when I was four years old and couldnt read yet, but was dying to learn. I remember
sitting in the waiting room of a doctors office with my mother, holding a Good Housekeeping
magazine in front of my face, turning the pages slowly, staring at the text, and hoping
the grown-ups in the waiting room would think I was actually reading. I havent felt so starved
for comprehension since then. I found some works by American poets in that bookstore, with
the original English version printed on one side of the page and the Italian translation on the
other. I bought a volume by Robert Lowell, another by Louise Glck.
There are spontaneous conversation classes everywhere. Today, I was sitting on a park
bench when a tiny old woman in a black dress came over, roosted down beside me and started
bossing me around about something. I shook my head, muted and confused. I apologized,
saying in very nice Italian, Im sorry, but I dont speak Italian, and she looked like she
wouldve smacked me with a wooden spoon, if shed had one. She insisted: You do understand!
(Interestingly, she was correct. That sentence, I did understand.) Now she wanted to
know where I was from. I told her I was from New York, and asked where she was from.
Duhshe was from Rome. Hearing this, I clapped my hands like a baby. Ah, Rome! Beautiful
Rome! I love Rome! Pretty Rome! She listened to my primitive rhapsodies with skepticism.
Then she got down to it and asked me if I was married. I told her I was divorced. This was the
first time Id said it to anyone, and here I was, saying it in Italian. Of course she demanded,
Perch? Well . . . why is a hard question to answer in any language. I stammered, then finally
came up with Labbiamo rotto (We broke it).
She nodded, stood up, walked up the street to her bus stop, got on her bus and did not
even turn around to look at me again. Was she mad at me? Strangely, I waited for her on that
park bench for twenty minutes, thinking against reason that she might come back and continue
our conversation, but she never returned. Her name was Celeste, pronounced with a
sharp ch, as in cello.
Later in the day, I found a library. Dear me, how I love a library. Because we are in Rome,
this library is a beautiful old thing, and within it there is a courtyard garden which youd never
have guessed existed if youd only looked at the place from the street. The garden is a perfect
square, dotted with orange trees and, in the center, a fountain. This fountain was going to be
a contender for my favorite in Rome, I could tell immediately, though it was unlike any Id
seen so far. It was not carved of imperial marble, for starters. This was a small green, mossy,
organic fountain. It was like a shaggy, leaking bush of ferns. (It looked, actually, exactly like
the wild foliage growing out of the head of that praying figure which the old medicine man in
Indonesia had drawn for me.) The water shot up out of the center of this flowering shrub, then
rained back down on the leaves, making a melancholy, lovely sound throughout the whole
courtyard.
I found a seat under an orange tree and opened one of the poetry books Id purchased
yesterday. Louise Glck. I read the first poem in Italian, then in English, and stopped short at
this line:
 Dal centro della mia vita venne una grande fontana . . .

From the center of my life, there came a great fountain . . .
I set the book down in my lap, shaking with relief.
Eat, Pray, Love

 13


 Truthfully, Im not the best traveler in the world.
I know this because Ive traveled a lot and Ive met people who are great at it. Real naturals.
Ive met travelers who are so physically sturdy they could drink a shoebox of water from a
Calcutta gutter and never get sick. People who can pick up new languages where others of us
might only pick up infectious diseases. People who know how to stand down a threatening
border guard or cajole an uncooperative bureaucrat at the visa office. People who are the
right height and complexion that they kind of look halfway normal wherever they goin Turkey
they just might be Turks, in Mexico they are suddenly Mexican, in Spain they could be
mistaken for a Basque, in Northern Africa they can sometimes pass for Arab . . .
I dont have these qualities. First off, I dont blend. Tall and blond and pink-complexioned, I
am less a chameleon than a flamingo. Everywhere I go but Dusseldorf, I stand out garishly.
When I was in China, women used to come up to me on the street and point me out to their
children as though I were some escaped zoo animal. And their childrenwho had never seen
anything quite like this pink-faced yellow-headed phantom personwould often burst into
tears at the sight of me. I really hated that about China.
Im bad (or, rather, lazy) at researching a place before I travel, tending just to show up and
see what happens. When you travel this way, what typically happens is that you end up
spending a lot of time standing in the middle of the train station feeling confused, or dropping
way too much money on hotels because you dont know better. My shaky sense of direction
and geography means I have explored six continents in my life with only the vaguest idea of
where I am at any given time. Aside from my cockeyed internal compass, I also have a shortage
of personal coolness, which can be a liability in travel. I have never learned how to arrange
my face into that blank expression of competent invisibility that is so useful when traveling
in dangerous, foreign places. You knowthat super-relaxed, totally-in-charge expression
which makes you look like you belong there, anywhere, everywhere, even in the middle of a
riot in Jakarta. Oh, no. When I dont know what Im doing, I look like I dont know what Im doing.
When Im excited or nervous, I look excited or nervous. And when I am lost, which is frequently,
I look lost. My face is a transparent transmitter of my every thought. As David once
put it, You have the opposite of poker face. You have, like . . . miniature golf face.
And, oh, the woes that traveling has inflicted on my digestive tract! I dont really want to
open that (forgive the expression) can of worms, but suffice it to say Ive experienced every
extreme of digestive emergency. In Lebanon I became so explosively ill one night that I could
only imagine Id somehow contracted a Middle Eastern version of the Ebola virus. In Hungary,
I suffered from an entirely different kind of bowel affliction, which changed forever the way I
feel about the term Soviet Bloc. But I have other bodily weaknesses, too. My back gave out
on my first day traveling in Africa, I was the only member of my party to emerge from the
jungles of Venezuela with infected spider bites, and I ask youI beg of you!who gets sunburned
in Stockholm?
Still, despite all this, traveling is the great true love of my life. I have always felt, ever since
I was sixteen years old and first went to Russia with my saved-up babysitting money, that to
travel is worth any cost or sacrifice. I am loyal and constant in my love for travel, as I have not
always been loyal and constant in my other loves. I feel about travel the way a happy new
mother feels about her impossible, colicky, restless newborn babyI just dont care what it
puts me through. Because I adore it. Because its mine. Because it looks exactly like me. It
can barf all over me if it wants toI just dont care.
Anyway, for a flamingo, Im not completely helpless out there in the world. I have my own
set of survival techniques. I am patient. I know how to pack light. Im a fearless eater. But my
one mighty travel talent is that I can make friends with anybody. I can make friends with the
dead. I once made friends with a war criminal in Serbia, and he invited me to go on a mountain
holiday with his family. Not that Im proud to list Serbian mass murderers amongst my
nearest and dearest (I had to befriend him for a story, and also so he wouldnt punch me), but
Im just sayingI can do it. If there isnt anyone else around to talk to, I could probably make
friends with a four-foot-tall pile of Sheetrock. This is why Im not afraid to travel to the most remote
places in the world, not if there are human beings there to meet. People asked me before
I left for Italy, Do you have friends in Rome? and I would just shake my head no, thinking
to myself, But I will.
Mostly, you meet your friends when traveling by accident, like by sitting next to them on a
train, or in a restaurant, or in a holding cell. But these are chance encounters, and you should
never rely entirely on chance. For a more systematic approach, there is still the grand old system
of the letter of introduction (today more likely to be an e-mail), presenting you formally to
the acquaintance of an acquaintance. This is a terrific way to meet people, if youre shameless
enough to make the cold call and invite yourself over for dinner. So before I left for Italy, I
asked everyone I knew in America if they had any friends in Rome, and Im happy to report
that I have been sent abroad with a substantial list of Italian contacts.
Among all the nominees on my Potential New Italian Friends List, I am most intrigued to
meet a fellow named . . . brace yourself . . . Luca Spaghetti. Luca Spaghetti is a good friend of
my buddy Patrick McDevitt, whom I know from my college days. And that is honestly his
name, I swear to God, Im not making it up. Its too crazy. I meanjust think of it. Imagine going
through life with a name like Patrick McDevitt?
Anyhow, I plan to get in touch with Luca Spaghetti just as soon as possible.
Eat, Pray, Love

 14


 First, though, I must get settled into school. My classes begin today at the Leonardo da
Vinci Academy of Language Studies, where I will be studying Italian five days a week, four
hours a day. Im so excited about school. Im such a shameless student. I laid my clothes out
last night, just like I did before my first day of first grade, with my patent leather shoes and my
new lunch box. I hope the teacher will like me.
We all have to take a test on the first day at Leonardo da Vinci, in order to be placed in the
proper level of Italian class for our abilities. When I hear this, I immediately start hoping I dont
place into a Level One class, because that would be humiliating, given that I already took a
whole entire semester of Italian at my Night School for Divorced Ladies in New York, and that
I spent the summer memorizing flash cards, and that Ive already been in Rome a week, and
have been practicing the language in person, even conversing with old grandmothers about
divorce. The thing is, I dont even know how many levels this school has, but as soon as I
heard the word level, I decided that I must test into Level Twoat least.
So its hammering down rain today, and I show up to school early (like I always
havegeek!) and I take the test. Its such a hard test! I cant get through even a tenth of it! I
know so much Italian, I know dozens of words in Italian, but they dont ask me anything that I
know. Then theres an oral exam, which is even worse. Theres this skinny Italian teacher interviewing
me and speaking way too fast, in my opinion, and I should be doing so much better
than this but Im nervous and making mistakes with stuff I already know (like, why did I say
Vado a scuola instead of Sono andata a scuola? I know that!).
In the end, its OK, though. The skinny Italian teacher looks over my exam and selects my
class level: Level TWO!
Classes begin in the afternoon. So I go eat lunch (roasted endive) then saunter back to
the school and smugly walk past all those Level One students (who must be molto stupido,
really) and enter my first class. With my peers. Except that it becomes swiftly evident that
these are not my peers and that I have no business being here because Level Two is really
impossibly hard. I feel like Im swimming, but barely. Like Im taking in water with every
breath. The teacher, a skinny guy (why are the teachers so skinny here? I dont trust skinny
Italians), is going way too fast, skipping over whole chapters of the textbook, saying, You
already know this, you already know that . . . and keeping up a rapid-fire conversation with
my apparently fluent classmates. My stomach is gripped in horror and Im gasping for air and
praying he wont call on me. Just as soon as the break comes, I run out of that classroom on
wobbling legs and I scurry all the way over to the administrative office almost in tears, where I
beg in very clear English if they could please move me down to a Level One class. And so
they do. And now I am here.
This teacher is plump and speaks slowly. This is much better.
Eat, Pray, Love

 15


 The interesting thing about my Italian class is that nobody really needs to be there. There
are twelve of us studying together, of all ages, from all over the world, and everybody has
come to Rome for the same reasonto study Italian just because they feel like it. Not one of
us can identify a single practical reason for being here. Nobodys boss has said to anyone, It
is vital that you learn to speak Italian in order for us to conduct our business overseas. Everybody,
even the uptight German engineer, shares what I thought was my own personal motive:
we all want to speak Italian because we love the way it makes us feel. A sad-faced Russian
woman tells us shes treating herself to Italian lessons because I think I deserve something
beautiful. The German engineer says, I want Italian because I love the dolce vitathe
sweet life. (Only, in his stiff Germanic accent, it ends up sounding like he said he loved the
deutsche vitathe German lifewhich Im afraid hes already had plenty of.)
As I will find out over the next few months, there are actually some good reasons that Italian
is the most seductively beautiful language in the world, and why Im not the only person
who thinks so. To understand why, you have to first understand that Europe was once a pandemonium
of numberless Latin-derived dialects that gradually, over the centuries, morphed
into a few separate languagesFrench, Portuguese, Spanish, Italian. What happened in
France, Portugal and Spain was an organic evolution: the dialect of the most prominent city
gradually became the accepted language of the whole region. Therefore, what we today call
French is really a version of medieval Parisian. Portuguese is really Lisboan. Spanish is essentially
Madrileo. These were capitalist victories; the strongest city ultimately determined
the language of the whole country.
Italy was different. One critical difference was that, for the longest time, Italy wasnt even a
country. It didnt get itself unified until quite late in life (1861) and until then was a peninsula of
warring city-states dominated by proud local princes or other European powers. Parts of Italy
belonged to France, parts to Spain, parts to the Church, parts to whoever could grab the local
fortress or palace. The Italian people were alternatively humiliated and cavalier about all this
domination. Most didnt much like being colonized by their fellow Europeans, but there was always
that apathetic crowd that said, Franza o Spagna, purch se magna, which means, in
dialect, France or Spain, as long as I can eat.
All this internal division meant that Italy never properly coalesced, and Italian didnt either.
So its not surprising that, for centuries, Italians wrote and spoke in local dialects that were
mutually unfathomable. A scientist in Florence could barely communicate with a poet in Sicily
or a merchant in Venice (except in Latin, of course, which was hardly considered the national
language). In the sixteenth century, some Italian intellectuals got together and decided that
this was absurd. This Italian peninsula needed an Italian language, at least in the written form,
which everyone could agree upon. So this gathering of intellectuals proceeded to do
something unprecedented in the history of Europe; they handpicked the most beautiful of all
the local dialects and crowned it Italian.
In order to find the most beautiful dialect ever spoken in Italy, they had to reach back in
time two hundred years to fourteenth-century Florence. What this congress decided would
henceforth be considered proper Italian was the personal language of the great Florentine
poet Dante Alighieri. When Dante published his Divine Comedy back in 1321, detailing a visionary
progression through Hell, Purgatory and Heaven, hed shocked the literate world by not
writing in Latin. He felt that Latin was a corrupted, elitist language, and that the use of it in serious
prose had turned literature into a harlot by making universal narrative into something
that could only be bought with money, through the privilege of an aristocratic education. Instead,
Dante turned back to the streets, picking up the real Florentine language spoken by the
residents of his city (who included such luminous contemporaries as Boccaccio and Petrarch)
and using that language to tell his tale.
He wrote his masterpiece in what he called dolce stil nuovo, the sweet new style of the
vernacular, and he shaped that vernacular even as he was writing it, affecting it as personally
as Shakespeare would someday affect Elizabethan English. For a group of nationalist intellectuals
much later in history to have sat down and decided that Dantes Italian would now be
the official language of Italy would be very much as if a group of Oxford dons had sat down
one day in the early nineteenth century and decided thatfrom this point forwardeverybody
in England was going to speak pure Shakespeare. And it actually worked.
The Italian we speak today, therefore, is not Roman or Venetian (though these were the
powerful military and merchant cities) nor even really entirely Florentine. Essentially, it is
Dantean. No other European language has such an artistic pedigree. And perhaps no language
was ever more perfectly ordained to express human emotions than this fourteenth-century
Florentine Italian, as embellished by one of Western civilizations greatest poets.
Dante wrote his Divine Comedy in terza rima, triple rhyme, a chain of rhymes with each
rhyme repeating three times every five lines, giving his pretty Florentine vernacular what
scholars call a cascading rhythma rhythm which still lives in the tumbling, poetic cadences
spoken by Italian cabdrivers and butchers and government administrators even today. The
last line of the Divine Comedy, in which Dante is faced with the vision of God Himself, is a
sentiment that is still easily understandable by anyone familiar with so-called modern Italian.
Dante writes that God is not merely a blinding vision of glorious light, but that He is, most of
all, lamor che move il sole e laltre stelle . . .
The love that moves the sun and the other stars.
So its really no wonder that I want so desperately to learn this language.
Eat, Pray, Love

 16


 Depression and Loneliness track me down after about ten days in Italy. I am walking
through the Villa Borghese one evening after a happy day spent in school, and the sun is setting
gold over St. Peters Basilica. I am feeling contented in this romantic scene, even if I am
all by myself, while everyone else in the park is either fondling a lover or playing with a laughing
child. But I stop to lean against a balustrade and watch the sunset, and I get to thinking a
little too much, and then my thinking turns to brooding, and thats when they catch up with me.
They come upon me all silent and menacing like Pinkerton Detectives, and they flank
meDepression on my left, Loneliness on my right. They dont need to show me their
badges. I know these guys very well. Weve been playing a cat-and-mouse game for years
now. Though I admit that I am surprised to meet them in this elegant Italian garden at dusk.
This is no place they belong.
I say to them, How did you find me here? Who told you I had come to Rome?
Depression, always the wise guy, says, Whatyoure not happy to see us?
Go away, I tell him.
Loneliness, the more sensitive cop, says, Im sorry, maam. But I might have to tail you
the whole time youre traveling. Its my assignment.
Id really rather you didnt, I tell him, and he shrugs almost apologetically, but only moves
closer.
Then they frisk me. They empty my pockets of any joy I had been carrying there. Depression
even confiscates my identity; but he always does that. Then Loneliness starts interrogating
me, which I dread because it always goes on for hours. Hes polite but relentless, and he
always trips me up eventually. He asks if I have any reason to be happy that I know of. He
asks why I am all by myself tonight, yet again. He asks (though weve been through this line
of questioning hundreds of times already) why I cant keep a relationship going, why I ruined
my marriage, why I messed things up with David, why I messed things up with every man Ive
ever been with. He asks me where I was the night I turned thirty, and why things have gone
so sour since then. He asks why I cant get my act together, and why Im not at home living in
a nice house and raising nice children like any respectable woman my age should be. He
asks why, exactly, I think I deserve a vacation in Rome when Ive made such a rubble of my
life. He asks me why I think that running away to Italy like a college kid will make me happy.
He asks where I think Ill end up in my old age, if I keep living this way.
I walk back home, hoping to shake them, but they keep following me, these two goons.
Depression has a firm hand on my shoulder and Loneliness harangues me with his interrogation.
I dont even bother eating dinner; I dont want them watching me. I dont want to let them
up the stairs to my apartment, either, but I know Depression, and hes got a billy club, so
theres no stopping him from coming in if he decides that he wants to.
Its not fair for you to come here, I tell Depression. I paid you off already. I served my
time back in New York.
But he just gives me that dark smile, settles into my favorite chair, puts his feet on my table
and lights a cigar, filling the place with his awful smoke. Loneliness watches and sighs,
then climbs into my bed and pulls the covers over himself, fully dressed, shoes and all. Hes
going to make me sleep with him again tonight, I just know it.
Eat, Pray, Love

 17


 Id stopped taking my medication only a few days earlier. It had just seemed crazy to be
taking antidepressants in Italy. How could I be depressed here?
Id never wanted to be on the medication in the first place. Id fought taking it for so long,
mainly because of a long list of personal objections (e.g.: Americans are overmedicated; we
dont know the long-term effects of this stuff yet on the human brain; its a crime that even
American children are on antidepressants these days; we are treating the symptoms and not
the causes of a national mental health emergency . . .). Still, during the last few years of my
life, there was no question that I was in grave trouble and that this trouble was not lifting
quickly. As my marriage dissolved and my drama with David evolved, Id come to have all the
symptoms of a major depressionloss of sleep, appetite and libido, uncontrollable weeping,
chronic backaches and stomachaches, alienation and despair, trouble concentrating on work,
inability to even get upset that the Republicans had just stolen a presidential election . . . it
went on and on.
When youre lost in those woods, it sometimes takes you a while to realize that you are
lost. For the longest time, you can convince yourself that youve just wandered a few feet off
the path, that youll find your way back to the trailhead any moment now. Then night falls
again and again, and you still have no idea where you are, and its time to admit that you
have bewildered yourself so far off the path that you dont even know from which direction the
sun rises anymore.
I took on my depression like it was the fight of my life, which, of course, it was. I became a
student of my own depressed experience, trying to unthread its causes. What was the root of
all this despair? Was it psychological? (Mom and Dads fault?) Was it just temporal, a bad
time in my life?(When the divorce ends, will the depression end with it?) Was it genetic?(Melancholy,
called by many names, has run through my family for generations, along with
its sad bride, Alcoholism.) Was it cultural? (Is this just the fallout of a postfeminist American
career girl trying to find balance in an increasingly stressful and alienating urban world?) Was
it astrological?(Am I so sad because Im a thin-skinned Cancer whose major signs are all
ruled by unstable Gemini?) Was it artistic? (Dont creative people always suffer from depres-
sion because were so supersensitive and special?) Was it evolutionary? (Do I carry in me the
residual panic that comes after millennia of my species attempting to survive a brutal world?)
Was it karmic? (Are all these spasms of grief just the consequences of bad behavior in previous
lifetimes, the last obstacles before liberation?) Was it hormonal? Dietary? Philosophical?
Seasonal? Environmental? Was I tapping into a universal yearning for God? Did I have a
chemical imbalance? Or did I just need to get laid?
What a large number of factors constitute a single human being! How very many layers
we operate on, and how very many influences we receive from our minds, our bodies, our histories,
our families, our cities, our souls and our lunches! I came to feel that my depression
was probably some ever-shifting assortment of all those factors, and probably also included
some stuff I couldnt name or claim. So I faced the fight at every level. I bought all those embarrassingly
titled self-help books (always being certain to wrap up the books in the latest issue
of Hustler, so that strangers wouldnt know what I was really reading). I commenced to
getting professional help with a therapist who was as kind as she was insightful. I prayed liked
a novice nun. I stopped eating meat (for a short time, anyway) after someone told me that I
was eating the fear of the animal at the moment of its death. Some spacey new age massage
therapist told me I should wear orange-colored panties, to rebalance my sexual chakras,
and, brotherI actually did it. I drank enough of that damn Saint-Johns-wort tea to cheer up
whole a Russian gulag, to no noticeable effect. I exercised. I exposed myself to the uplifting
arts and carefully protected myself from sad movies, books and songs (if anyone even mentioned
the words Leonard and Cohen in the same sentence, I would have to leave the room).
I tried so hard to fight the endless sobbing. I remember asking myself one night, while I
was curled up in the same old corner of my same old couch in tears yet again over the same
old repetition of sorrowful thoughts, Is there anything about this scene you can change, Liz?
And all I could think to do was stand up, while still sobbing, and try to balance on one foot in
the middle of my living room. Just to prove thatwhile I couldnt stop the tears or change my
dismal interior dialogueI was not yet totally out of control: at least I could cry hysterically
while balanced on one foot. Hey, it was a start.
I crossed the street to walk in the sunshine. I leaned on my support network, cherishing
my family and cultivating my most enlightening friendships. And when those officious womens
magazines kept telling me that my low self-esteem wasnt helping depression matters
at all, I got myself a pretty haircut, bought some fancy makeup and a nice dress. (When a
friend complimented my new look, all I could say, grimly, was, Operation Self-EsteemDay
Fucking One.)
The last thing I tried, after about two years of fighting this sorrow, was medication. If I may
impose my opinions here, I think it should always be the last thing you try. For me, the de-
cision to go the route of Vitamin P happened after a night when Id sat on the floor of my
bedroom for many hours, trying very hard to talk myself out of cutting into my arm with a kitchen
knife. I won the argument against the knife that night, but barely. I had some other good
ideas around that timeabout how jumping off a building or blowing my brains out with a gun
might stop the suffering. But something about spending a night with a knife in my hand did it.
The next morning I called my friend Susan as the sun came up, begged her to help me. I
dont think a woman in the whole history of my family had ever done that before, had ever sat
down in the middle of the road like that and said, in the middle of her life, I cannot walk another
step furthersomebody has to help me. It wouldnt have served those women to have
stopped walking. Nobody would have, or could have, helped them. The only thing that
wouldve happened was that they and their families would have starved. I couldnt stop thinking
about those women.
And I will never forget Susans face when she rushed into my apartment about an hour
after my emergency phone call and saw me in a heap on the couch. The image of my pain
mirrored back at me through her visible fear for my life is still one of the scariest memories for
me out of all those scary years. I huddled in a ball while Susan made the phone calls and
found me a psychiatrist who would give me a consultation that very day, to discuss the possibility
of prescribing antidepressants. I listened to Susans one-sided conversation with the
doctor, listened to her say, Im afraid my friend is going to seriously hurt herself. I was afraid,
too.
When I went to see the psychiatrist that afternoon, he asked me what had taken me so
long to get helpas if I hadnt been trying to help myself already for so long. I told him my objections
and reservations about antidepressants. I laid copies of the three books Id already
published on his desk, and I said, Im a writer. Please dont do anything to harm my brain.
He said, If you had a kidney disease, you wouldnt hesitate to take medication for itwhy are
you hesitating with this? But, see, that only shows how ignorant he was about my family; a
Gilbert might very well not medicate a kidney disease, seeing that were a family who regard
any sickness as a sign of personal, ethical, moral failure.
He put me on a few different drugsXanax, Zoloft, Wellbutrin, Busperinuntil we found
the combination that didnt make me nauseated or turn my libido into a dim and distant
memory. Quickly, in less than a week, I could feel an extra inch of daylight opening in my
mind. Also, I could finally sleep. And this was the real gift, because when you cannot sleep,
you cannot get yourself out of the ditchtheres not a chance. The pills gave me those recuperative
night hours back, and also stopped my hands from shaking and released the vise
grip around my chest and the panic alert button from inside my heart.
Still, I never relaxed into taking those drugs, though they helped immediately. It never
mattered who told me these medications were a good idea and perfectly safe; I always felt
conflicted about it. Those drugs were part of my bridge to the other side, theres no question
about it, but I wanted to be off them as soon as possible. Id started taking the medication in
January of 2003. By May, I was already diminishing my dosage significantly. Those had been
the toughest months, anyhowthe last months of the divorce, the last ragged months with
David. Could I have endured that time without the drugs, if Id just held out a little longer?
Could I have survived myself, by myself? I dont know. Thats the thing about a human
lifetheres no control group, no way to ever know how any of us would have turned out if
any variables had been changed.
I do know these drugs made my misery feel less catastrophic. So Im grateful for that. But
Im still deeply ambivalent about mood-altering medications. Im awed by their power, but concerned
by their prevalence. I think they need to be prescribed and used with much more restraint
in this country, and never without the parallel treatment of psychological counseling.
Medicating the symptom of any illness without exploring its root cause is just a classically
hare-brained Western way to think that anyone could ever get truly better. Those pills might
have saved my life, but they did so only in conjunction with about twenty other efforts I was
making simultaneously during that same period to rescue myself, and I hope to never have to
take such drugs again. Though one doctor did suggest that I might have to go on and off antidepressants
many times in my life because of my tendency toward melancholy. I hope to
God hes wrong. I intend to do everything I can to prove him wrong, or at least to fight that
melancholic tendency with every tool in the shed. Whether this makes me self-defeatingly
stubborn, or self-preservingly stubborn, I cannot say.
But there I am.
Eat, Pray, Love

 18


 Or, ratherhere I am. I am in Rome, and I am in trouble. The goons of Depression and
Loneliness have barged into my life again, and I just took my last Wellbutrin three days ago.
There are more pills in my bottom drawer, but I dont want them. I want to be free of them
forever. But I dont want Depression or Loneliness around, either, so I dont know what to do,
and Im spiraling in panic, like I always spiral when I dont know what to do. So what I do for
tonight is reach for my most private notebook, which I keep next to my bed in case Im ever in
emergency trouble. I open it up. I find the first blank page. I write:
I need your help.
Then I wait. After a little while, a response comes, in my own handwriting:
 Im right here. What can I do for you?

And here recommences my strangest and most secret conversation.
Here, in this most private notebook, is where I talk to myself. I talk to that same voice I met
that night on my bathroom floor when I first prayed to God in tears for help, when something
(or somebody) had said, Go back to bed, Liz. In the years since then, Ive found that voice
again in times of code-orange distress, and have learned that the best way for me to reach it
is written conversation. Ive been surprised to find that I can almost always access that voice,
too, no matter how black my anguish may be. Even during the worst of suffering, that calm,
compassionate, affectionate and infinitely wise voice (who is maybe me, or maybe not exactly
me) is always available for a conversation on paper at any time of day or night.
Ive decided to let myself off the hook from worrying that conversing with myself on paper
means Im a schizo. Maybe the voice I am reaching for is God, or maybe its my Guru speaking
through me, or maybe its the angel who was assigned to my case, or maybe its my
Highest Self, or maybe it is indeed just a construct of my subconscious, invented in order to
protect me from my own torment. Saint Teresa called such divine internal voices
locutionswords from the supernatural that enter the mind spontaneously, translated into
your own language and offering you heavenly consolation. I do know what Freud would have
said about such spiritual consolations, of coursethat they are irrational and deserve no
trust. Experience teaches us that the world is no nursery. I agreethe world isnt a nursery.
But the very fact that this world is so challenging is exactly why you sometimes must reach
out of its jurisdiction for help, appealing to a higher authority in order to find your comfort.
At the beginning of my spiritual experiment, I didnt always have such faith in this internal
voice of wisdom. I remember once reaching for my private notebook in a bitter fury of rage
and sorrow, and scrawling a message to my inner voiceto my divine interior comfortthat
took up an entire page of capital letters:
I DO NOT FUCKING BELIEVE IN YOU!!!!!!!!
After a moment, still breathing heavily, I felt a clear pinpoint of light ignite within me, and
then I found myself writing this amused and ever-calm reply:
 Who are you talking to, then?

I havent doubted its existence again since. So tonight I reach for that voice again. This is
the first time Ive done this since I came to Italy. What I write in my journal tonight is that I am
weak and full of fear. I explain that Depression and Loneliness have shown up, and Im
scared they will never leave. I say that I dont want to take the drugs anymore, but Im
frightened I will have to. Im terrified that I will never really pull my life together.
In response, somewhere from within me, rises a now-familiar presence, offering me all the
certainties I have always wished another person would say to me when I was troubled. This is
what I find myself writing to myself on the page:
 Im here. I love you. I dont care if you need to stay up crying all night long, I will stay with
you. If you need the medication again, go ahead and take itI will love you through that, as
well. If you dont need the medication, I will love you, too. Theres nothing you can ever do to
lose my love. I will protect you until you die, and after your death I will still protect you. I am
stronger than Depression and I am braver than Loneliness and nothing will ever exhaust me.

Tonight, this strange interior gesture of friendshipthe lending of a hand from me to myself
when nobody else is around to offer solacereminds me of something that happened to
me once in New York City. I walked into an office building one afternoon in hurry, dashed into
the waiting elevator. As I rushed in, I caught an unexpected glimpse of myself in a security
mirrors reflection. In that moment my brain did an odd thingit fired off this split-second message:
Hey! You know her! Thats a friend of yours! And I actually ran forward toward my own
reflection with a smile, ready to welcome that girl whose name I had lost but whose face was
so familiar. In a flash instant, of course, I realized my mistake and laughed in embarrassment
at my almost doglike confusion over how a mirror works. But for some reason that incident
comes to mind again tonight during my sadness in Rome, and I find myself writing this comforting
reminder at the bottom of the page:
 Never forget that once upon a time, in an unguarded moment, you recognized yourself as a
friend.

I fall asleep holding my notebook pressed against my chest, open to this most recent assurance.
In the morning when I wake up, I can still smell a faint trace of Depressions lingering
smoke, but he himself is nowhere to be seen. Somewhere during the night, he got up and left.
And his buddy Loneliness beat it, too.
Eat, Pray, Love

 19


 Heres whats strange, though. I havent seemed to be able to do any Yoga since getting to
Rome. For years Ive had a steady and serious practice, and I even brought my Yoga mat
with me, along with my best intentions. But it just isnt happening here. I mean, when am I going
to do my Yoga stretches? Before my Italian speedball breakfast of chocolate pastries and
double cappuccino? Or after? The first few days I was here, I would gamely roll out my Yoga
mat every morning, but found I could only look at it and laugh. Once I even said aloud to myself,
in the character of the Yoga mat: OK, little Miss Penne ai Quattro Formaggi . . . lets see
what you got today. Abashed, I stashed the Yoga mat away in the bottom of my suitcase
(never to be unrolled again, it would turn out, until India). Then I went for a walk and ate some
pistachio gelato. Which Italians consider a perfectly reasonable thing to be eating at 9:30 AM,
and I frankly could not agree with them more.
The culture of Rome just doesnt match the culture of Yoga, not as far as I can see. In
fact, Ive decided that Rome and Yoga dont have anything in common at all. Except for the
way they both kind of remind you of the word toga.
Eat, Pray, Love

 20


 I needed to make some friends. So I got busy with it, and now it is October and I have a
nice assortment of them. I know two Elizabeths in Rome now, besides myself. Both are American,
both are writers. The first Elizabeth is a novelist and the second Elizabeth is a food
writer. With an apartment in Rome, a house in Umbria, an Italian husband and a job that requires
her to travel around Italy eating food and writing about it for Gourmet, it appears that
the second Elizabeth must have saved a lot of orphans from drowning during a previous lifetime.
Unsurprisingly, she knows all the best places to eat in Rome, including a gelateria that
serves a frozen rice pudding (and if they dont serve this kind of thing in heaven, then I really
dont want to go there). She took me out to lunch the other day, and what we ate included not
only lamb and truffles and carpaccio rolled around hazelnut mousse but an exotic little serving
of pickled lampascione, which isas everyone knowsthe bulb of the wild hyacinth.
Of course, by now Ive also made friends with Giovanni and Dario, my Tandem Language
Exchange fantasy twins. Giovannis sweetness, in my opinion, makes him a national treasure
of Italy. He endeared himself to me forever the first night we met, when I was getting frustrated
with my inability to find the words I wanted in Italian, and he put his hand on my arm
and said, Liz, you must be very polite with yourself when you are learning something new.
Sometimes I feel like hes older than me, what with his solemn brow and his philosophy degree
and his serious political opinions. I like to try to make him laugh, but Giovanni doesnt always
get my jokes. Humor is hard to catch in a second language. Especially when youre as
serious a young man as Giovanni. He said to me the other night, When you are ironic, I am
always behind you. I am slower. It is like you are the lightning and I am the thunder.
And I thought, Yeah, baby! And you are the magnet and I am the steel! Bring to me your
leather, take from me my lace!
But still, he has not kissed me.
I dont very often see Dario, the other twin, though he does spend a lot of his time with
Sofie. Sofie is my best friend from my language class, and shes definitely somebody youd
want to spend your time with, too, if you were Dario. Sofie is Swedish and in her late twenties
and so damn cute you could put her on a hook and use her as bait to catch men of all differ-
ent nationalities and ages. Sofie has just taken a four-month leave of absence from her good
job in a Swedish bank, much to the horror of her family and bewilderment of her colleagues,
only because she wanted to come to Rome and learn how to speak beautiful Italian. Every
day after class, Sofie and I go sit by the Tiber, eating our gelato and studying with each other.
You cant even rightly call it studying, the thing that we do. Its more like a shared relishing of
the Italian language, an almost worshipful ritual, and were always offering each other new
wonderful idioms. Like, for instance, we just learned the other day that unamica stretta
means a close friend. But stretta literally means tight, as in clothing, like a tight skirt. So a
close friend, in Italian, is one you that can wear tightly, snug against your skin, and that is
what my little Swedish friend Sofie is becoming to me.
At the beginning, I liked to think that Sofie and I looked like sisters. Then we were taking a
taxi through Rome the other day and the guy driving the cab asked if Sofie was my daughter.
Now, folksthe girl is only about seven years younger than I am. My mind went into such a
spin-control mode, trying to explain away what hed said. (For instance, I thought, Maybe this
native Roman cabdriver doesnt speak Italian very well, and meant to ask if we were sisters.)
But, no. He said daughter and he meant daughter. Oh, what can I say? Ive been through a lot
in the last few years. I must look so beat-up and old after this divorce. But as that old country-western
song out of Texas goes, Ive been screwed and sued and tattooed, and Im still
standin here in front of you . . .
Ive also become friends with a cool couple named Maria and Giulio, introduced to me by
my friend Annean American painter who lived in Rome a few years back. Maria is from
America, Giulios from the south of Italy. Hes a filmmaker, she works for an international agricultural
policy organization. He doesnt speak great English, but she speaks fluent Italian (and
also fluent French and Chinese, so thats not intimidating). Giulio wants to learn English, and
asked if he could practice conversing with me in another Tandem Exchange. In case youre
wondering why he couldnt just study English with his American-born wife, its because theyre
married and they fight too much whenever one tries to teach anything to the other one. So Giulio
and I now meet for lunch twice a week to practice our Italian and English; a good task for
two people who dont have any history of irritating each other.
Giulio and Maria have a beautiful apartment, the most impressive feature of which is, to
my mind, the wall that Maria once covered with angry curses against Giulio (scrawled in thick
black magic marker) because they were having an argument and he yells louder than me
and she wanted to get a word in edgewise.
I think Maria is terrifically sexy, and this burst of passionate graffiti is only further evidence
of it. Interestingly, though, Giulio sees the scrawled-upon wall as a sure sign of Marias repression,
because she wrote her curses against him in Italian, and Italian is her second lan-
guage, a language she has to think about for a moment before she can choose her words. He
said if Maria had truly allowed herself to be overcome by angerwhich she never does, because
shes a good Anglo-Protestantthen she would have written all over that wall in her
native English. He says all Americans are like this: repressed. Which makes them dangerous
and potentially deadly when they do blow up.
A savage people, he diagnoses.
What I love is that we all had this conversation over a nice relaxed dinner, while looking at
the wall itself.
More wine, honey? asked Maria.
But my newest best friend in Italy is, of course, Luca Spaghetti. Even in Italy, by the way,
its considered a very funny thing to have a last name like Spaghetti. Im grateful for Luca because
he has finally allowed me to get even with my friend Brian, who was lucky enough to
have grown up next door to a Native American kid named Dennis Ha-Ha, and therefore could
always boast that he had the friend with the coolest name. Finally, I can offer competition.
Luca also speaks perfect English and is a good eater (in Italian, una buona forchettaa
good fork), so hes terrific company for the hungry likes of me. He often calls in the middle of
the day to say, Hey, Im in your neighborhoodwant to meet up for a quick cup of coffee? Or
a plate of oxtail? We spend a lot of time in these dirty little dives in the back streets of Rome.
We like the restaurants with the fluorescent lighting and no name listed outside. Plastic redcheckered
tablecloths. Homemade limoncello liqueur. Homemade red wine. Pasta served in
unbelievable quantities by what Luca calls little Julius Caesarsproud, pushy, local guys
with hair on the backs of their hands and passionately tended pompadours. I once said to
Luca, It seems to me these guys consider themselves Romans first, Italians second and
Europeans third. He corrected me. Nothey are Romans first, Romans second and Romans
third. And every one of them is an Emperor.
Luca is a tax accountant. An Italian tax accountant, which means that he is, in his own description,
an artist, because there are several hundred tax laws on the books in Italy and all
of them contradict each other. So filing a tax return here requires jazzlike improvisation. I think
its funny that hes a tax accountant, because it seems like such stiff work for such a lighthearted
guy. On the other hand, Luca thinks its funny that theres another side of methis
Yoga sidethat hes never seen. He cant imagine why I would want to go to Indiaand to
an Ashram, of all places!when I could just stay in Italy all year, which is obviously where I
belong. Whenever he watches me sopping up the leftover gravy from my plate with a hunk of
bread and then licking my fingers, he says, What are you going to eat when you go to India?
Sometimes he calls me Gandhi, in a most ironic tone, generally when Im opening the second
bottle of wine.
Luca has traveled a fair amount, though he claims he could never live anywhere but in
Rome, near his mother, since he is an Italian man, after allwhat can he say? But its not just
his mamma who keeps him around. Hes in his early thirties, and has had the same girlfriend
since he was a teenager (the lovely Giuliana, whom Luca describes fondly and aptly as acqua
e saponesoap and water in her sweet innocence). All his friends are the same friends hes
had since childhood, and all from the same neighborhood. They watch the soccer matches together
every Sundayeither at the stadium or in a bar (if the Roman teams are playing
away)and then they all return separately to the homes where they grew up, in order to eat
the big Sunday afternoon meals cooked by their respective mothers and grandmothers.
I wouldnt move from Rome, either, if I were Luca Spaghetti.
Luca has visited America a few times, though, and likes it. He finds New York City fascinating
but thinks that people work too hard there, though he admits they seem to enjoy it.
Whereas Romans work hard and resent it massively. What Luca Spaghetti doesnt like is
American food, which he says can be described in two words: Amtrak Pizza.
I was with Luca the first time I ever tried eating the intestines of a newborn lamb. This is a
Roman specialty. Food-wise, Rome is actually a pretty rough town, known for its coarse traditional
fare like guts and tonguesall the parts of the animal the rich people up north throw
away. My lamb intestines tasted OK, as long as I didnt think too much about what they were.
They were served in a heavy, buttery, savory gravy that itself was terrific, but the intestines
had a kind of . . . well . . . intestinal consistency. Kind of like liver, but mushier. I did well with
them until I started trying to think how I would describe this dish, and I thought, It doesnt look
like intestines. It actually looks like tapeworms. Then I pushed it aside and asked for a salad.
You dont like it? asked Luca, who loves the stuff.
I bet Gandhi never ate lamb intestines in his life, I said.
He could have.
No, he couldnt have, Luca. Gandhi was a vegetarian.
But vegetarians can eat this, Luca insisted. Because intestines arent even meat, Liz.
Theyre just shit.
Eat, Pray, Love

 21


 Sometimes I wonder what Im doing here, I admit it.
While I have come to Italy in order to experience pleasure, during the first few weeks I was
here, I felt a bit of panic as to how one should do that. Frankly, pure pleasure is not my cultural
paradigm. I come from a long line of superconscientious people. My mothers family were
Swedish immigrant farmers, who look in their photographs like, if theyd ever even seen
something pleasurable, they might have stomped on it with their hobnailed boots.(My uncle
calls the whole lot of them oxen.) My fathers side of the family were English Puritans, those
great goofy lovers of fun. If I look on my dads family tree all the way back to the seventeenth
century, I can actually find Puritan relatives with names like Diligence and Meekness.
My own parents have a small farm, and my sister and I grew up working. We were taught
to be dependable, responsible, the top of our classes at school, the most organized and efficient
babysitters in town, the very miniature models of our hardworking farmer/nurse of a
mother, a pair of junior Swiss Army knives, born to multitask. We had a lot of enjoyment in my
family, a lot of laughter, but the walls were papered with to-do lists and I never experienced or
witnessed idleness, not once in my whole entire life.
Generally speaking, though, Americans have an inability to relax into sheer pleasure. Ours
is an entertainment-seeking nation, but not necessarily a pleasure-seeking one. Americans
spend billions to keep themselves amused with everything from porn to theme parks to wars,
but thats not exactly the same thing as quiet enjoyment. Americans work harder and longer
and more stressful hours than anyone in the world today. But as Luca Spaghetti pointed out,
we seem to like it. Alarming statistics back this observation up, showing that many Americans
feel more happy and fulfilled in their offices than they do in their own homes. Of course, we all
inevitably work too hard, then we get burned out and have to spend the whole weekend in our
pajamas, eating cereal straight out of the box and staring at the TV in a mild coma (which is
the opposite of working, yes, but not exactly the same thing as pleasure). Americans dont
really know how to do nothing. This is the cause of that great sad American stereotypethe
overstressed executive who goes on vacation, but who cannot relax.
I once asked Luca Spaghetti if Italians on vacation have that same problem. He laughed
so hard he almost drove his motorbike into a fountain.
Oh, no! he said. We are the masters of bel far niente.
This is a sweet expression. Bel far niente means the beauty of doing nothing. Now
listenItalians have traditionally always been hard workers, especially those long-suffering
laborers known as braccianti (so called because they had nothing but the brute strength of
their armsbraccieto help them survive in this world). But even against that backdrop of
hard work, bel far niente has always been a cherished Italian ideal. The beauty of doing nothing
is the goal of all your work, the final accomplishment for which you are most highly congratulated.
The more exquisitely and delightfully you can do nothing, the higher your lifes
achievement. You dont necessarily need to be rich in order to experience this, either. Theres
another wonderful Italian expression: larte darrangiarsithe art of making something out of
nothing. The art of turning a few simple ingredients into a feast, or a few gathered friends into
a festival. Anyone with a talent for happiness can do this, not only the rich.
For me, though, a major obstacle in my pursuit of pleasure was my ingrained sense of
Puritan guilt. Do I really deserve this pleasure? This is very American, toothe insecurity
about whether we have earned our happiness. Planet Advertising in America orbits completely
around the need to convince the uncertain consumer that yes, you have actually warranted
a special treat. This Buds for You! You Deserve a Break Today! Because Youre
Worth It! Youve Come a Long Way, Baby! And the insecure consumer thinks, Yeah! Thanks!
I am gonna go buy a six-pack, damn it! Maybe even two six-packs! And then comes the reactionary
binge. Followed by the remorse. Such advertising campaigns would probably not be
as effective in the Italian culture, where people already know that they are entitled to enjoyment
in this life. The reply in Italy to You Deserve a Break Today would probably be, Yeah,
no duh. Thats why Im planning on taking a break at noon, to go over to your house and
sleep with your wife.
Which is probably why, when I told my Italian friends that Id come to their country in order
to experience four months of pure pleasure, they didnt have any hang-ups about it. Complimenti!
Vai avanti! Congratulations, they would say. Go ahead. Knock yourself out. Be our
guest. Nobody once said, How completely irresponsible of you, or What a self-indulgent
luxury. But while the Italians have given me full permission to enjoy myself, I still cant quite
let go. During my first few weeks in Italy, all my Protestant synapses were zinging in distress,
looking for a task. I wanted to take on pleasure like a homework assignment, or a giant science
fair project. I pondered such questions as, How is pleasure most efficiently maximized?
I wondered if maybe I should spend all my time in Italy in the library, doing research on
the history of pleasure. Or maybe I should interview Italians whove experienced a lot of
pleasure in their lives, asking them what their pleasures feel like, and then writing a report on
this topic. (Double-spaced and with one-inch margins, perhaps? To be turned in first thing
Monday morning?)
When I realized that the only question at hand was, How do I define pleasure? and that I
was truly in a country where people would permit me to explore that question freely,
everything changed. Everything became . . . delicious. All I had to do was ask myself every
day, for the first time in my life, What would you enjoy doing today, Liz? What would bring
you pleasure right now? With nobody elses agenda to consider and no other obligations to
worry about, this question finally became distilled and absolutely self-specific.
It was interesting for me to discover what I did not want to do in Italy, once Id given myself
executive authorization to enjoy my experience there. There are so many manifestations of
pleasure in Italy, and I didnt have time to sample them all. You have to kind of declare a
pleasure major here, or youll get overwhelmed. That being the case, I didnt get into fashion,
or opera, or cinema, or fancy automobiles, or skiing in the Alps. I didnt even want to look at
that much art. I am a bit ashamed to admit this, but I did not visit a single museum during my
entire four months in Italy. (Oh, manits even worse than that. I have to confess that I did go
to one museum: the National Museum of Pasta, in Rome.) I found that all I really wanted was
to eat beautiful food and to speak as much beautiful Italian as possible. That was it. So I declared
a double major, reallyin speaking and in eating (with a concentration on gelato).
The amount of pleasure this eating and speaking brought to me was inestimable, and yet
so simple. I passed a few hours once in the middle of October that might look like nothing
much to the outside observer, but which I will always count amongst the happiest of my life. I
found a market near my apartment, only a few streets over from me, which Id somehow never
noticed before. There I approached a tiny vegetable stall with one Italian woman and her
son selling a choice assortment of their producesuch as rich, almost algae-green leaves of
spinach, tomatoes so red and bloody they looked like a cows organs, and champagne-colored
grapes with skins as tight as a showgirls leotard.
I selected a bunch of thin, bright asparagus. I was able to ask the woman, in comfortable
Italian, if I could possibly just take half this asparagus home? There was only one of me, I explained
to herI didnt need much. She promptly took the asparagus from my hands and
halved it. I asked her if I could find this market every day in the same place, and she said,
yes, she was here every day, from 7:00 AM. Then her son, who was very cute, gave me a sly
look and said, Well, she tries to be here at seven . . . We all laughed. This whole conversation
was conducted in Italiana language I could not speak a word of only a few months
earlier.
I walked home to my apartment and soft-boiled a pair of fresh brown eggs for my lunch. I
peeled the eggs and arranged them on a plate beside the seven stalks of the asparagus
(which were so slim and snappy they didnt need to be cooked at all). I put some olives on the
plate, too, and the four knobs of goat cheese Id picked up yesterday from the formaggeria
down the street, and two slices of pink, oily salmon. For desserta lovely peach, which the
woman at the market had given to me for free and which was still warm from the Roman sunlight.
For the longest time I couldnt even touch this food because it was such a masterpiece
of lunch, a true expression of the art of making something out of nothing. Finally, when I had
fully absorbed the prettiness of my meal, I went and sat in a patch of sunbeam on my clean
wooden floor and ate every bite of it, with my fingers, while reading my daily newspaper article
in Italian. Happiness inhabited my every molecule.
Untilas often happened during those first months of travel, whenever I would feel such
happinessmy guilt alarm went off. I heard my ex-husbands voice speaking disdainfully in
my ear: So this is what you gave up everything for? This is why you gutted our entire life together?
For a few stalks of asparagus and an Italian newspaper?
I replied aloud to him. First of all, I said, Im very sorry, but this isnt your business anymore.
And secondly, to answer your question . . . yes.
Eat, Pray, Love

 22


 One obvious topic still needs to be addressed concerning my whole pursuit of pleasure
thing in Italy: What about sex?
To answer that question simply: I dont want to have any while Im here.
To answer it more thoroughly and honestlyof course, sometimes I do desperately want
to have some, but Ive decided to sit this particular game out for a while. I dont want to get involved
with anybody. Of course I do miss being kissed because I love kissing. (I complain
about this so much to Sofie that the other day she finally said in exasperation, For Gods
sake, Lizif it gets bad enough, Ill kiss you.) But Im not going to do anything about it for
now. When I get lonely these days, I think: So be lonely, Liz. Learn your way around loneliness.
Make a map of it. Sit with it, for once in your life. Welcome to the human experience.
But never again use another persons body or emotions as a scratching post for your own unfulfilled
yearnings.
Its a kind of emergency life-saving policy, more than anything else. I got started early in
life with the pursuit of sexual and romantic pleasure. I barely had an adolescence before I had
my first boyfriend, and I have consistently had a boy or a man (or sometimes both) in my life
ever since I was fifteen years old. That wasoh, lets seeabout nineteen years ago, now.
Thats almost two solid decades I have been entwined in some kind of drama with some kind
of guy. Each overlapping the next, with never so much as a weeks breather in between. And I
cant help but think thats been something of a liability on my path to maturity.
Moreover, I have boundary issues with men. Or maybe thats not fair to say. To have issues
with boundaries, one must have boundaries in the first place, right? But I disappear into
the person I love. I am the permeable membrane. If I love you, you can have everything. You
can have my time, my devotion, my ass, my money, my family, my dog, my dogs money, my
dogs timeeverything. If I love you, I will carry for you all your pain, I will assume for you all
your debts (in every definition of the word), I will protect you from your own insecurity, I will
project upon you all sorts of good qualities that you have never actually cultivated in yourself
and I will buy Christmas presents for your entire family. I will give you the sun and the rain,
and if they are not available, I will give you a sun check and a rain check. I will give you all
this and more, until I get so exhausted and depleted that the only way I can recover my energy
is by becoming infatuated with someone else.
I do not relay these facts about myself with pride, but this is how its always been.
Some time after Id left my husband, I was at a party and a guy I barely knew said to me,
You know, you seem like a completely different person, now that youre with this new boyfriend.
You used to look like your husband, but now you look like David. You even dress like
him and talk like him. You know how some people look like their dogs? I think maybe you always
look like your men.
Dear God, I could use a little break from this cycle, to give myself some space to discover
what I look like and talk like when Im not trying to merge with someone. And also, lets be
honestit might be a generous public service for me to leave intimacy alone for a while.
When I scan back on my romantic record, it doesnt look so good. Its been one catastrophe
after another. How many more different types of men can I keep trying to love, and continue
to fail? Think of it this wayif youd had ten serious traffic accidents in a row, wouldnt they
eventually take your drivers license away? Wouldnt you kind of want them to?
Theres a final reason Im hesitant to get involved with someone else. I still happen to be
in love with David, and I dont think thats fair to the next guy. I dont even know if David and I
are totally broken up yet. We were still hanging around each other a lot before I left for Italy,
though we hadnt slept together in a long time. But we were still admitting that we both harbored
hopes that maybe someday . . .
I dont know.
This much I do knowIm exhausted by the cumulative consequences of a lifetime of
hasty choices and chaotic passions. By the time I left for Italy, my body and my spirit were depleted.
I felt like the soil on some desperate sharecroppers farm, sorely overworked and
needing a fallow season. So thats why Ive quit.
Believe me, I am conscious of the irony of going to Italy in pursuit of pleasure during a
period of self-imposed celibacy. But I do think abstinence is the right thing for me at the moment.
I was especially sure of it the night I could hear my upstairs neighbor (a very pretty Italian
girl with an amazing collection of high-heeled boots) having the longest, loudest, fleshsmackingest,
bed-thumpingest, back-breakingest session of lovemaking Id ever heard, in the
company of the latest lucky visitor to her apartment. This slam-dance went on for well over an
hour, complete with hyperventilating sound effects and wild animal calls. I lay there only one
floor below them, alone and tired in my bed, and all I could think was, That sounds like an awful
lot of work . . .
Of course sometimes I really do become overcome with lust. I walk past an average of
about a dozen Italian men a day whom I could easily imagine in my bed. Or in theirs. Or
wherever. To my taste, the men in Rome are ridiculously, hurtfully, stupidly beautiful. More
beautiful even than Roman women, to be honest. Italian men are beautiful in the same way
as French women, which is to sayno detail spared in the quest for perfection. Theyre like
show poodles. Sometimes they look so good I want to applaud. The men here, in their
beauty, force me to call upon romance novel rhapsodies in order to describe them. They are
devilishly attractive, or cruelly handsome, or surprisingly muscular.
However, if I may admit something not entirely flattering to myself, these Romans on the
street arent really giving me any second looks. Or even many first looks, for that matter. I
found this kind of alarming at first. Id been to Italy once before, back when I was nineteen,
and what I remember is being constantly harassed by men on the street. And in the pizzerias.
And at the movies. And in the Vatican. It was endless and awful. It used to be a real liability
about traveling in Italy, something that could almost even spoil your appetite. Now, at the age
of thirty-four, I am apparently invisible. Sure, sometimes a man will speak to me in a friendly
way, You look beautiful today, signorina, but its not all that common and it never gets aggressive.
And while its certainly nice, of course, to not get pawed by a disgusting stranger on
the bus, one does have ones feminine pride, and one must wonder, What has changed here?
Is it me? Or is it them?
So I ask around, and everybody agrees that, yes, theres been a true shift in Italy in the
last ten to fifteen years. Maybe its a victory of feminism, or an evolution of culture, or the inevitable
modernizing effects of having joined the European Union. Or maybe its just simple
embarrassment on the part of young men about the infamous lewdness of their fathers and
grandfathers. Whatever the cause, though, it seems that Italy has decided as a society that
this sort of stalking, pestering behavior toward women is no longer acceptable. Not even my
lovely young friend Sofie gets harassed on the streets, and those milkmaid-looking Swedish
girls used to really get the worst of it.
In conclusionit seems Italian men have earned themselves the Most Improved Award.
Which is a relief, because for a while there I was afraid it was me. I mean, I was afraid
maybe I wasnt getting any attention because I was no longer nineteen years old and pretty. I
was afraid that maybe my friend Scott was correct last summer when he said, Ah, dont
worry, Lizthose Italian guys wont bother you anymore. It aint like France, where they dig
the old babes.
Eat, Pray, Love

 23


 Yesterday afternoon I went to the soccer game with Luca Spaghetti and his friends. We
were there to watch Lazio play. There are two soccer teams in RomeLazio and Roma. The
rivalry between the teams and their fans is immense, and can divide otherwise happy families
and peaceful neighborhoods into civil war zones. Its important that you choose early in life
whether you are a Lazio fan or a Roma fan, because this will determine, to a large part, whom
you hang out with every Sunday afternoon for the rest of time.
Luca has a group of about ten close friends who all love each other like brothers. Except
that half of them are Lazio fans and half of them are Roma fans. They cant really help it; they
were all born into families where the loyalty was already established. Lucas grandfather (who
I hope is known as Nonno Spaghetti) gave him his first sky-blue Lazio jersey when the boy
was just a toddler. Luca, likewise, will be a Lazio fan until he dies.
We can change our wives, he said. We can change our jobs, our nationalities and even
our religions, but we can never change our team.
By the way, the word for fan in Italian is tifoso. Derived from the word for typhus. In other
wordsone who is mightily fevered.
My first soccer game with Luca Spaghetti was, for me, a delirious banquet of Italian language.
I learned all sorts of new and interesting words in that stadium which they dont teach
you in school. There was an old man sitting behind me, stringing together such a gorgeous
flower-chain of curses as he screamed down at the players on the field. I dont know all that
much about soccer, but I sure didnt waste any time asking Luca inane questions about what
was going on in the game. All I kept demanding was, Luca, what did the guy behind me just
say? What does cafone mean? And Lucanever taking his eyes from the fieldwould reply,
Asshole. It means asshole.
I would write it down. Then shut my eyes and listen to some more of the old mans rant,
which went something like:
 Dai, dai, dai, Albertini, dai . . . va bene, va bene, ragazzo mio, perfetto, bravo, bravo . . .
Dai! Dai! Via! Via! Nella porta! Eccola, eccola, eccola, mio bravo ragazzo, caro mio, eccola,
eccola, eccoAAAHHHHHHHHH!!! VAFFANCULO!!! FIGLIO DI MIGNOTTA!! STRONZO!
CAFONE! TRA-DITORE! Madonna . . . Ah, Dio mio, perch, perch, perch, questo  stupido,
 una vergogna, la vergogna . . . Che casino, che bordello . . . NON HAI UN CUORE,
ALBERTINI! FAI FINTA! Guarda, non  successo niente . . . Dai, dai, ah. . . . Molto migliore,
Albertini, molto migliore, s s s, eccola, bello, bravo, anima mia, ah, ottimo, eccola adesso . .
. nella porta, nella porta, nellVAFFANCULO!!!!!!!

Which I can attempt to translate as:
 Come on, come on, come on, Albertini, come on . . . OK, OK, my boy, perfect, brilliant, brilliant
. . . Come on! Come on! Go! Go! In the goal! There it is, there it is, there it is, my brilliant
boy, my dear, there it is, there it is, thereAHHHH! GO FUCK YOURSELF! YOU SON OF A
BITCH! SHITHEAD! ASSHOLE! TRAITOR! . . . Mother of God . . . Oh my God, why, why,
why, this is stupid, this is shameful, the shame of it . . . What a mess . . . [Authors note: Unfortunately
theres no good way to translate into English the fabulous Italian expressions che
casino and che bordello, which literally mean what a casino, and what a whorehouse, but
essentially mean what a friggin mess.] . . . YOU DONT HAVE A HEART, ALBERTINI!!!!
YOURE A FAKER! Look, nothing happened . . . Come on, come on, hey, yes . . . Much better,
Albertini, much better, yes yes yes, there it is, beautiful, brilliant, oh, excellent, there it is
now . . . in the goal, in the goal, in theFUUUUUCK YOUUUUUUU!!!
Oh, it was such an exquisite and lucky moment in my life to be sitting right in front of this
man. I loved every word out of his mouth. I wanted to lean my head back into his old lap and
let him pour his eloquent curses into my ears forever. And it wasnt just him! The whole stadium
was full of such soliloquies. At such high fervor! Whenever there was some grave miscarriage
of justice on the field, the entire stadium would rise to its feet, every man waving his
arms in outrage and cursing, as if all 20,000 of them had just been in a traffic altercation. The
Lazio players were no less dramatic than their fans, rolling on the ground in pain like death
scenes from Julius Caesar, totally playing to the back row, then jumping up on their feet two
seconds later to lead another attack on the goal.
Lazio lost, though.
Needing to be cheered up after the game, Luca Spaghetti asked his friends, Should we
go out?
I assumed this meant, Should we go out to a bar? Thats what sports fans in America
would do if their team had just lost. Theyd go to a bar and get good and drunk. And not just
Americans would do thisso would the English, the Australians, the Germans . . . everyone,
right? But Luca and his friends didnt go out to a bar to cheer themselves up. They went to a
bakery. A small, innocuous bakery hidden in a basement in a nondescript district in Rome.
The place was crowded that Sunday night. But it always is crowded after the games. The
Lazio fans always stop here on their way home from the stadium to stand in the street for
hours, leaning up against their motorcycles, talking about the game, looking macho as anything,
and eating cream puffs.
I love Italy.
Eat, Pray, Love

 24


 I am learning about twenty new Italian words a day. Im always studying, flipping through
my index cards while I walk around the city, dodging local pedestrians. Where am I getting the
brain space to store these words? Im hoping that maybe my mind has decided to clear out
some old negative thoughts and sad memories and replace them with these shiny new words.
I work hard at Italian, but I keep hoping it will one day just be revealed to me, whole, perfect.
One day I will open my mouth and be magically fluent. Then I will be a real Italian girl, instead
of a total American who still cant hear someone call across the street to his friend
Marco without wanting instinctively to yell back Polo! I wish that Italian would simply take up
residence within me, but there are so many glitches in this language. Like, why are the Italian
words for tree and hotel (albero vs. albergo) so very similar? This causes me to keep accidentally
telling people that I grew up on a Christmas hotel farm instead of the more accurate
and slightly less surreal description: Christmas tree farm. And then there are words with
double or even triple meanings. For instance: tasso. Which can mean either interest rate,
badger, or yew tree. Depending on the context, I suppose. Most upsetting to me is when I
stumble on Italian words that are actuallyI hate to say itugly. I take this as almost a personal
affront. Im sorry, but I didnt come all the way to Italy to learn how to say a word like
schermo (screen).
Still, overall its so worthwhile. Its mostly a pure pleasure. Giovanni and I have such a
good time teaching each other idioms in English and Italian. We were talking the other evening
about the phrases one uses when trying to comfort someone who is in distress. I told him
that in English we sometimes say, Ive been there. This was unclear to him at firstIve
been where? But I explained that deep grief sometimes is almost like a specific location, a coordinate
on a map of time. When you are standing in that forest of sorrow, you cannot imagine
that you could ever find your way to a better place. But if someone can assure you that
they themselves have stood in that same place, and now have moved on, sometimes this will
bring hope.
So sadness is a place? Giovanni asked.
Sometimes people live there for years, I said.
In return, Giovanni told me that empathizing Italians say Lho provato sulla mia pelle,
which means I have experienced that on my own skin. Meaning, I have also been burned or
scarred in this way, and I know exactly what youre going through.
So far, though, my favorite thing to say in all of Italian is a simple, common word:
 Attraversiamo.

It means, Lets cross over. Friends say it to each other constantly when theyre walking
down the sidewalk and have decided its time to switch to the other side of the street. Which is
to say, this is literally a pedestrian word. Nothing special about it. Still, for some reason, it
goes right through me. The first time Giovanni said it to me, we were walking near the Colosseum.
I suddenly heard him speak that beautiful word, and I stopped dead, demanding, What
does that mean? What did you just say?
 Attraversiamo.

He couldnt understand why I liked it so much. Lets cross the street? But to my ear, its
the perfect combination of Italian sounds. The wistful ah of introduction, the rolling trill, the
soothing s, that lingering ee-ah-moh combo at the end. I love this word. I say it all the time
now. I invent any excuse to say it. Its making Sofie nuts. Lets cross over! Lets cross over!
Im constantly dragging her back and forth across the crazy traffic of Rome. Im going to get
us both killed with this word.
Giovannis favorite word in English is half-assed.
Luca Spaghettis is surrender.
Eat, Pray, Love

 25


 Theres a power struggle going on across Europe these days. A few cities are competing
against each other to see who shall emerge as the great twenty-first-century European metropolis.
Will it be London? Paris? Berlin? Zurich? Maybe Brussels, center of the young union?
They all strive to outdo one another culturally, architecturally, politically, fiscally. But Rome, it
should be said, has not bothered to join the race for status. Rome doesnt compete. Rome
just watches all the fussing and striving, completely unfazed, exuding an air like: Heydo
whatever you want, but Im still Rome. I am inspired by the regal self-assurance of this town,
so grounded and rounded, so amused and monumental, knowing that she is held securely in
the palm of history. I would like to be like Rome when I am an old lady.
I take myself on a six-hour walk through town today. This is easy to do, especially if you
stop frequently to fuel up on espresso and pastries. I start at my apartment door, then wander
through the cosmopolitan shopping center that is my neighborhood. (Though I wouldnt exactly
call this a neighborhood, not in the traditional sense. I mean, if it is a neighborhood, then
my neighbors are those just-plain-regular-folk with names like the Valentinos, the Guccis and
the Armanis.) This has always been an upscale district. Rubens, Tennyson, Stendhal, Balzac,
Liszt, Wagner, Thackeray, Byron, Keatsthey all stayed here. I live in what they used to call
The English Ghetto, where all the posh aristocrats rested on their European grand tours.
One London touring club was actually called The Society of Dilettantiimagine advertising
that youre a dilettante! Oh, the glorious shamelessness of it . . .
I walk over to the Piazza del Popolo, with its grand arch, carved by Bernini in honor of the
historic visit of Queen Christina of Sweden (who was really one of historys neutron bombs.
Heres how my Swedish friend Sofie describes the great queen: She could ride, she could
hunt, she was a scholar, she became a Catholic and it was a huge scandal. Some say she
was a man, but at least she was probably a lesbian. She dressed in pants, she went on archaeological
excavations, she collected art and she refused to leave an heir). Next to the
arch is a church where you can walk in for free and see two paintings by Caravaggio depicting
the martyrdom of Saint Peter and the conversion of Saint Paul (so overcome by grace that
he has fallen to the ground in holy rapture; not even his horse can believe it). Those Caravag-
gio paintings always make me feel weepy and overwhelmed, but I cheer myself up by moving
to the other side of the church and enjoying a fresco which features the happiest, goofiest,
giggliest little baby Jesus in all of Rome.
I start walking south again. I pass the Palazzo Borghese, a building that has known many
famous tenants, including Pauline, Napoleons scandalous sister, who kept untold numbers of
lovers there. She also liked to use her maids as footstools. (One always hopes that one has
read this sentence wrong in ones Companion Guide to Rome, but, noit is accurate. Pauline
also liked to be carried to her bath, we are told, by a giant Negro.) Then I stroll along the
banks of the great, swampy, rural-looking Tiber, all the way down to the Tiber Island, which is
one of my favorite quiet places in Rome. This island has always been associated with healing.
A Temple of Aesculapius was built there after a plague in 291 BC; in the Middle Ages a hospital
was constructed there by a group of monks called the Fatebene-fratelli (which can
groovily be translated as The Do-Good Brothers); and there is a hospital on the island even
to this day.
I cross over the river to Trasteverethe neighborhood that claims to be inhabited by the
truest Romans, the workers, the guys who have, over the centuries, built all the monuments
on the other side of the Tiber. I eat my lunch in a quiet trattoria here, and I linger over my food
and wine for many hours because nobody in Trastevere is ever going to stop you from lingering
over your meal if thats what you would like to do. I order an assortment of bruschette,
some spaghetti cacio e pepe (that simple Roman specialty of pasta served with cheese and
pepper) and then a small roast chicken, which I end up sharing with the stray dog who has
been watching me eat my lunch the way only a stray dog can.
Then I walk back over the bridge, through the old Jewish ghetto, a sorely tearful place that
survived for centuries until it was emptied by the Nazis. I head back north, past the Piazza
Navona with its mammoth fountain honoring the four great rivers of Planet Earth (proudly, if
not totally accurately, including the sluggish Tiber in that list). Then I go have a look at the
Pantheon. I try to look at the Pantheon every chance I get, since I am here in Rome after all,
and an old proverb says that anyone who goes to Rome without seeing the Pantheon goes
and comes back an ass.
On my way back home I take a little detour and stop at the address in Rome I find most
strangely affectingthe Augusteum. This big, round, ruined pile of brick started life as a glorious
mausoleum, built by Octavian Augustus to house his remains and the remains of his family
for all of eternity. It must have been impossible for the emperor to have imagined at the
time that Rome would ever be anything but a mighty Augustus-worshipping empire. How
could he possibly have foreseen the collapse of the realm? Or known that, with all the aqueducts
destroyed by barbarians and with the great roads left in ruin, the city would empty of cit-
izens, and it would take almost twenty centuries before Rome ever recovered the population
she had boasted during her height of glory?
Augustuss mausoleum fell to ruins and thieves during the Dark Ages. Somebody stole the
emperors ashesno telling who. By the twelfth century, though, the monument had been
renovated into a fortress for the powerful Colonna family, to protect them from assaults by
various warring princes. Then the Augusteum was transformed somehow into a vineyard,
then a Renaissance garden, then a bullring (were in the eighteenth century now), then a fireworks
depository, then a concert hall. In the 1930s, Mussolini seized the property and restored
it down to its classical foundations, so that it could someday be the final resting place
for his remains. (Again, it must have been impossible back then to imagine that Rome could
ever be anything but a Mussolini-worshipping empire.) Of course, Mussolinis fascist dream
did not last, nor did he get the imperial burial hed anticipated.
Today the Augusteum is one of the quietest and loneliest places in Rome, buried deep in
the ground. The city has grown up around it over the centuries. (One inch a year is the general
rule of thumb for the accumulation of times debris.) Traffic above the monument spins in a
hectic circle, and nobody ever goes down therefrom what I can tellexcept to use the
place as a public bathroom. But the building still exists, holding its Roman ground with dignity,
waiting for its next incarnation.
I find the endurance of the Augusteum so reassuring, that this structure has had such an
erratic career, yet always adjusted to the particular wildness of the times. To me, the Augusteum
is like a person whos led a totally crazy lifewho maybe started out as a housewife,
then unexpectedly became a widow, then took up fan-dancing to make money, ended up
somehow as the first female dentist in outer space, and then tried her hand at national politicsyet
who has managed to hold an intact sense of herself throughout every upheaval.
I look at the Augusteum, and I think that perhaps my life has not actually been so chaotic,
after all. It is merely this world that is chaotic, bringing changes to us all that nobody could
have anticipated. The Augusteum warns me not to get attached to any obsolete ideas about
who I am, what I represent, whom I belong to, or what function I may once have intended to
serve. Yesterday I might have been a glorious monument to somebody, true enoughbut tomorrow
I could be a fireworks depository. Even in the Eternal City, says the silent Augusteum,
one must always be prepared for riotous and endless waves of transformation.
Eat, Pray, Love

 26


 I had shipped ahead a box of books to myself, right before I left New York to move to Italy.
The box was guaranteed to arrive at my Roman apartment within four to six days, but I think
the Italian post office must have misread that instruction as forty-six days, for two months
have passed now, and I have seen no sign of my box. My Italian friends tell me to put the box
out of my mind completely. They say that the box may arrive or it may not arrive, but such
things are out of our hands.
Did someone maybe steal it? I ask Luca Spaghetti. Did the post office lose it?
He covers his eyes. Dont ask these questions, he says. Youll only make yourself upset.
The mystery of my missing box prompts a long discussion one night between me, my
American friend Maria and her husband, Giulio. Maria thinks that in a civilized society one
should be able to rely on such things as the post office delivering ones mail in a prompt manner,
but Giulio begs to differ. He submits that the post office belongs not to man, but to the
fates, and that delivery of mail is not something anybody can guarantee. Maria, annoyed,
says this is only further evidence of the Protestant-Catholic divide. This divide is best proven,
she says, by the fact that Italiansincluding her own husbandcan never make plans for the
future, not even a week in advance. If you ask a Protestant from the American Midwest to
commit to a dinner date next week, that Protestant, believing that she is the captain of her
own destiny, will say, Thursday night works fine for me. But if you ask a Catholic from Calabria
to make the same commitment, he will only shrug, turn his eyes to God, and ask, How
can any of us know whether we will be free for dinner next Thursday night, given that
everything is in Gods hands and none of us can know our fate?
Still, I go to the post office a few times to try to track down my box, to no avail. The Roman
postal employee is not at all happy to have her phone call to her boyfriend interrupted by my
presence. And my Italianwhich has been getting better, honestlyfails me in such stressful
circumstances. As I try to speak logically about my missing box of books, the woman looks at
me like Im blowing spit bubbles.
Maybe it will be here next week? I ask her in Italian.
She shrugs: Magari.
Another untranslatable bit of Italian slang, meaning something between hopefully and in
your dreams, sucker.
Ah, maybe its for the best. I cant even remember now what books Id packed in the box
in the first place. Surely it was some stuff I thought I should study, if I were to truly understand
Italy. Id packed that box full of all sorts of due-diligence research material about Rome that
just seems unimportant now that Im here. I think I even loaded the complete unabridged text
of Gibbons History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire into that box. Maybe Im
happier without it, after all. Given that life is so short, do I really want to spend one-ninetieth of
my remaining days on earth reading Edward Gibbon?
Eat, Pray, Love

 27


 I met a young Australian girl last week who was backpacking through Europe for the first
time in her life. I gave her directions to the train station. She was heading up to Slovenia, just
to check it out. When I heard her plans, I was stricken with such a dumb spasm of jealousy,
thinking, I want to go to Slovenia! How come I never get to travel anywhere?
Now, to the innocent eye it might appear that I already am traveling. And longing to travel
while you are already traveling is, I admit, a kind of greedy madness. Its kind of like fantasizing
about having sex with your favorite movie star while youre having sex with your other favorite
movie star. But the fact that this girl asked directions from me (clearly, in her mind, a civilian)
suggests that I am not technically traveling in Rome, but living here. However temporary
it may be, I am a civilian. When I ran into the girl, in fact, I was just on my way to pay my
electricity bill, which is not something travelers worry about. Traveling-to-a-place energy and
living-in-a-place energy are two fundamentally different energies, and something about meeting
this Australian girl on her way to Slovenia just gave me such a jones to hit the road.
And thats why I called my friend Sofie and said, Lets go down to Naples for the day and
eat some pizza!
Immediately, just a few hours later, we are on the train, and thenlike magicwe are
there. I instantly love Naples. Wild, raucous, noisy, dirty, balls-out Naples. An anthill inside a
rabbit warren, with all the exoticism of a Middle Eastern bazaar and a touch of New Orleans
voodoo. A tripped-out, dangerous and cheerful nuthouse. My friend Wade came to Naples in
the 1970s and was mugged . . . in a museum. The city is all decorated with the laundry that
hangs from every window and dangles across every street; everybodys fresh-washed undershirts
and brassieres flapping in the wind like Tibetan prayer flags. There is not a street in
Naples in which some tough little kid in shorts and mismatched socks is not screaming up
from the sidewalk to some other tough little kid on a rooftop nearby. Nor is there a building in
this town that doesnt have at least one crooked old woman seated at her window, peering
suspiciously down at the activity below.
The people here are so insanely psyched to be from Naples, and why shouldnt they be?
This is a city that gave the world pizza and ice cream. The Neapolitan women in particular are
such a gang of tough-voiced, loud-mouthed, generous, nosy dames, all bossy and annoyed
and right up in your face and just trying to friggin help you for chrissake, you dopewhy they
gotta do everything around here? The accent in Naples is like a friendly cuff on the ear. Its
like walking through a city of short-order cooks, everybody hollering at the same time. They
still have their own dialect here, and an ever-changing liquid dictionary of local slang, but
somehow I find that the Neapolitans are the easiest people for me to understand in Italy.
Why? Because they want you to understand, damn it. They talk loud and emphatically, and if
you cant understand what theyre actually saying out of their mouths, you can usually pick up
the inference from the gesture. Like that punk little grammar-school girl on the back of her
older cousins motorbike, who flipped me the finger and a charming smile as she drove by,
just to make me understand, Hey, no hard feelings, lady. But Im only seven, and I can
already tell youre a complete moron, but thats coolI think youre halfway OK despite yourself
and I kinda like your dumb-ass face. We both know you would love to be me, but
sorryyou cant. Anyhow, heres my middle finger, enjoy your stay in Naples, and ciao!
As in every public space in Italy, there are always boys, teenagers and grown men playing
soccer, but here in Naples theres something extra, too. For instance, today I found kidsI
mean, a group of eight-year-old boyswho had gathered up some old chicken crates to create
makeshift chairs and a table, and they were playing poker in the piazza with such intensity
I feared one of them might get shot.
Giovanni and Dario, my Tandem Exchange twins, are originally from Naples. I cannot picture
it. I cannot imagine shy, studious, sympathetic Giovanni as a young boy amongst
thisand I dont use the word lightlymob. But he is Neapolitan, no question about it, because
before I left Rome he gave me the name of a pizzeria in Naples that I had to try, because,
Giovanni informed me, it sold the best pizza in Naples. I found this a wildly exciting
prospect, given that the best pizza in Italy is from Naples, and the best pizza in the world is
from Italy, which means that this pizzeria must offer . . . Im almost too superstitious to say it .
. . the best pizza in the world? Giovanni passed along the name of the place with such seriousness
and intensity, I almost felt I was being inducted into a secret society. He pressed the
address into the palm of my hand and said, in gravest confidence, Please go to this pizzeria.
Order the margherita pizza with double mozzarella. If you do not eat this pizza when you are
in Naples, please lie to me later and tell me that you did.
So Sofie and I have come to Pizzeria da Michele, and these pies we have just
orderedone for each of usare making us lose our minds. I love my pizza so much, in fact,
that I have come to believe in my delirium that my pizza might actually love me, in return. I am
having a relationship with this pizza, almost an affair. Meanwhile, Sofie is practically in tears
over hers, shes having a metaphysical crisis about it, shes begging me, Why do they even
bother trying to make pizza in Stockholm? Why do we even bother eating food at all in Stockholm?

Pizzeria da Michele is a small place with only two rooms and one nonstop oven. Its about
a fifteen-minute walk from the train station in the rain, dont even worry about it, just go. You
need to get there fairly early in the day because sometimes they run out of dough, which will
break your heart. By 1:00 PM, the streets outside the pizzeria have become jammed with
Neapolitans trying to get into the place, shoving for access like theyre trying to get space on
a lifeboat. Theres not a menu. They have only two varieties of pizza hereregular and extra
cheese. None of this new age southern California olives-and-sun-dried-tomato wannabe pizza
twaddle. The dough, it takes me half my meal to figure out, tastes more like Indian nan than
like any pizza dough I ever tried. Its soft and chewy and yielding, but incredibly thin. I always
thought we only had two choices in our lives when it came to pizza crustthin and crispy, or
thick and doughy. How was I to have known there could be a crust in this world that was thin
and doughy? Holy of holies! Thin, doughy, strong, gummy, yummy, chewy, salty pizza paradise.
On top, there is a sweet tomato sauce that foams up all bubbly and creamy when it
melts the fresh buffalo mozzarella, and the one sprig of basil in the middle of the whole deal
somehow infuses the entire pizza with herbal radiance, much the same way one shimmering
movie star in the middle of a party brings a contact high of glamour to everyone around her.
Its technically impossible to eat this thing, of course. You try to take a bite off your slice and
the gummy crust folds, and the hot cheese runs away like topsoil in a landslide, makes a
mess of you and your surroundings, but just deal with it.
The guys who make this miracle happen are shoveling the pizzas in and out of the woodburning
oven, looking for all the world like the boilermen in the belly of a great ship who
shovel coal into the raging furnaces. Their sleeves are rolled up over their sweaty forearms,
their faces red with exertion, one eye squinted against the heat of the fire and a cigarette
dangling from the lips. Sofie and I each order another pieanother whole pizza eachand
Sofie tries to pull herself together, but really, the pizza is so good we can barely cope.
A word about my body. I am gaining weight every day, of course. I am doing rude things to
my body here in Italy, taking in such ghastly amounts of cheese and pasta and bread and
wine and chocolate and pizza dough. (Elsewhere in Naples, Id been told, you can actually
get something called chocolate pizza. What kind of nonsense is that? I mean, later I did go
find some, and its delicious, but honestlychocolate pizza?) Im not exercising, Im not eating
enough fiber, Im not taking any vitamins. In my real life, I have been known to eat organic
goats milk yoghurt sprinkled with wheat germ for breakfast. My real-life days are long gone.
Back in America, my friend Susan is telling people Im on a No Carb Left Behind tour. But
my body is being such a good sport about all this. My body is turning a blind eye to my misdo-
ings and my overindulgences, as if to say, OK, kid, live it up, I recognize that this is just temporary.
Let me know when your little experiment with pure pleasure is over, and Ill see what I
can do about damage control.
Still, when I look at myself in the mirror of the best pizzeria in Naples, I see a bright-eyed,
clear-skinned, happy and healthy face. I havent seen a face like that on me for a long time.
Thank you, I whisper. Then Sofie and I run out in the rain to look for pastries.
Eat, Pray, Love

 28


 It is this happiness, I suppose (which is really a few months old by now), that gets me to
thinking upon my return to Rome that I need to do something about David. That maybe its
time for us to end our story forever. We were already separated, that was official, but there
was still a window of hope left open that perhaps someday (maybe after my travels, maybe
after a year apart) we could give things another try. We loved each other. That was never the
question. Its just that we couldnt figure out how to stop making each other desperately,
shriekingly, soul-punishingly miserable.
Last spring David had offered this crazy solution to our woes, only half in jest: What if we
just acknowledged that we have a bad relationship, and we stuck it out, anyway? What if we
admitted that we make each other nuts, we fight constantly and hardly ever have sex, but we
cant live without each other, so we deal with it? And then we could spend our lives togetherin
misery, but happy to not be apart.
Let it be a testimony to how desperately I love this guy that I have spent the last ten
months giving that offer serious consideration.
The other alternative in the backs of our minds, of course, was that one of us might
change. He might become more open and affectionate, not withholding himself from anyone
who loves him on the fear that she will eat his soul. Or I might learn how to . . . stop trying to
eat his soul.
So many times I had wished with David that I could behave more like my mother does in
her marriageindependent, strong, self-sufficient. A self-feeder. Able to exist without regular
doses of romance or flattery from my solitary farmer of a father. Able to cheerfully plant gardens
of daisies among the inexplicable stone walls of silence that my dad sometimes builds
up around himself. My dad is quite simply my favorite person in the world, but he is a bit of an
odd case. An ex-boyfriend of mine once described him this way: Your father only has one
foot on this earth. And really, really long legs . . .
What I grew up watching in my household was a mother who would receive her husbands
love and affection whenever he thought to offer it, but would then step aside and take care of
herself whenever he drifted off into his own peculiar universe of low-grade oblivious neglect.
This is how it looked to me, anyway, taking into account that nobody (and especially not the
children) ever knows the secrets of a marriage. What I believed I grew up seeing was a mother
who asked nothing of anybody. This was my mom, after alla woman who had taught herself
how to swim as an adolescent, alone in a cold Minnesota lake, with a book shed borrowed
from the local library entitled How to Swim. To my eye, there was nothing this woman
could not do on her own.
But then Id had a revelatory conversation with my mother, not long before Id left for
Rome. Shed come into New York to have one last lunch with me, and shed asked me
franklybreaking all the rules of communication in our familys historywhat had happened
between me and David. Further disregarding the Gilbert Family Standard Communications
Rule-book, I actually told her. I told her everything. I told her how much I loved David, but how
lonely and heartsick it made me to be with this person who was always disappearing from the
room, from the bed, from the planet.
He sounds kind of like your father, she said. A brave and generous admission.
The problem is, I said, Im not like my mother. Im not as tough as you, Mom. Theres a
constant level of closeness that I really need from the person I love. I wish I could be more
like you, then I could have this love story with David. But it just destroys me to not be able to
count on that affection when I need it.
Then my mother shocked me. She said, All those things that you want from your relationship,
Liz? I have always wanted those things, too.
In that moment, it was as if my strong mother reached across the table, opened her fist
and finally showed me the handful of bullets shed had to bite over the decades in order to
stay happily married (and she is happily married, all considerations weighed) to my father. I
had never seen this side of her before, not ever. I had never imagined what she might have
wanted, what she might have been missing, what she might have decided not to fight for in
the larger scheme of things. Seeing all this, I could feel my worldview start to make a radical
shift.
 If even she wants what I want, then . . .?

Continuing with this unprecedented string of intimacies, my mother said, You have to understand
how little I was raised to expect that I deserved in life, honey. RememberI come
from a different time and place than you do.
I closed my eyes and saw my mother, ten years old on the family farm in Minnesota, working
like a hired hand, raising her younger brothers, wearing the clothes of her older sister,
saving dimes to get herself out of there . . .
And you have to understand how much I love your father, she concluded.
My mother has made choices in her life, as we all must, and she is at peace with them. I
can see her peace. She did not cop out on herself. The benefits of her choices are
massivea long, stable marriage to a man she still calls her best friend; a family that has extended
now into grandchildren who adore her; a certainty in her own strength. Maybe some
things were sacrificed, and my dad made his sacrifices, toobut who amongst us lives
without sacrifice?
And the question now for me is, What are my choices to be? What do I believe that I deserve
in this life? Where can I accept sacrifice, and where can I not? It has been so hard for
me to imagine living a life without David in it. Even just to imagine that there will never be another
road trip with my favorite traveling companion, that I will never again pull up at his curb
with the windows down and Springsteen playing on the radio, a lifetime supply of banter and
snacks between us, and an ocean destination looming down the highway. But how can I accept
that bliss when it comes with this dark undersidebone-crushing isolation, corrosive insecurity,
insidious resentment and, of course, the complete dismantling of self that inevitably
occurs when David ceases to giveth, and commences to taketh away. I cant do it anymore.
Something about my recent joy in Naples has made me certain that I not only can find happiness
without David, but must. No matter how much I love him (and I do love him, in stupid excess),
I have to say goodbye to this person now. And I have to make it stick.
So I write him an e-mail.
Its November. We havent had any communication since July. Id asked him not to get in
touch with me while I was traveling, knowing that my attachment to him was so strong it would
be impossible for me to focus on my journey if I were also tracking his. But now Im entering
his life again with this e-mail.
I tell him that I hope hes well, and I report that I am well. I make a few jokes. We always
were good with the jokes. Then I explain that I think we need to put an end to this relationship
for good. That maybe its time to admit that it will never happen, that it should never happen.
The note isnt overly dramatic. Lord knows weve had enough drama together already. I keep
it short and simple. But theres one more thing I need to add. Holding my breath, I type, If you
want to look for another partner in your life, of course you have nothing but my blessings. My
hands are shaking. I sign off with love, trying to keep as cheerful a tone as possible.
I feel like I just got hit in the chest with a stick.
I dont sleep much that night, imagining him reading my words. I run back to the Internet
caf a few times throughout the next day, looking for a response. Im trying to ignore the part
of me that is dying to find that he has replied: COME BACK! DONT GO! ILL CHANGE! Im
trying to disregard the girl in me who would happily drop this whole grand idea of traveling
around the world in simple exchange for the keys to Davids apartment. But around ten
oclock that night, I finally get my answer. A wonderfully written e-mail, of course. David always
wrote wonderfully. He agrees that, yes, its time we really said good-bye forever. Hes
been thinking along the same lines himself, he says. He couldnt be more gracious in his response,
and he shares his own feelings of loss and regret with that high tenderness he was
sometimes so achingly capable of reaching. He hopes that I know how much he adores me,
beyond even his ability to find words to express it. But we are not what the other one needs,
he says. Still, he is certain that I will find great love in my life someday. Hes sure of it. After
all, he says, beauty attracts beauty.
Which is a lovely thing to say, truly. Which is just about the loveliest thing that the love of
your life could ever possibly say, when hes not saying, COME BACK! DONT GO! ILL
CHANGE!
I sit there staring at the computer screen in silence for a long, sad time. Its all for the best,
I know it is. Im choosing happiness over suffering, I know I am. Im making space for the unknown
future to fill up my life with yet-to-come surprises. I know all this. But still . . .
Its David. Lost to me now.
I drop my face in my hands for a longer and even sadder time. Finally I look up, only to
see that one of the Albanian women who work at the Internet caf has paused from her nightshift
mopping of the floor to lean against the wall and watch me. We hold our tired gazes on
each other for a moment. Then I give her a grim shake of my head and say aloud, This blows
ass. She nods sympathetically. She doesnt understand, but of course, in her way, she understands
completely.
My cell phone rings.
Its Giovanni. He sounds confused. He says hes been waiting for me for over an hour in
the Piazza Fiume, which is where we always meet on Thursday nights for language exchange.
Hes bewildered, because normally hes the one whos late or who forgets to show up
for our appointments, but he got there right on time tonight for once and he was pretty
suredidnt we have a date?
Id forgotten. I tell him where I am. He says hell come pick me up in his car. Im not in the
mood for seeing anybody, but its too hard to explain this over the telefonino, given our limited
language skills. I go wait outside in the cold for him. A few minutes later, his little red car pulls
up and I climb in. He asks me in slangy Italian whats up. I open my mouth to answer and collapse
into tears. I meanwailing. I meanthat terrible, ragged breed of bawling my friend
Sally calls double-pumpin it, when you have to inhale two desperate gasps of oxygen with
every sob. I never even saw this griefquake coming, got totally blindsided by it.
Poor Giovanni! He asks in halting English if he did something wrong. Am I mad at him,
maybe? Did he hurt my feelings? I cant answer, but only shake my head and keep howling.
Im so mortified with myself and so sorry for dear Giovanni, trapped here in this car with this
sobbing, incoherent old woman who is totally a pezziin pieces.
I finally manage to rasp out an assurance that my distress has nothing to do with him. I
choke forth an apology for being such a mess. Giovanni takes charge of the situation in a
manner far beyond his years. He says, Do not apologize for crying. Without this emotion, we
are only robots. He gives me some tissues from a box in the back of the car. He says, Lets
drive.
Hes rightthe front of this Internet caf is far too public and brightly lit a place to fall
apart. He drives for a bit, then pulls the car over in the center of the Piazza della Repubblica,
one of Romes more noble open spaces. He parks in front of that gorgeous fountain with the
bodacious naked nymphs cavorting so pornographically with their phallic flock of stiff-necked
giant swans. This fountain was built fairly recently, by Roman standards. According to my
guidebook, the women who modeled for the nymphs were a pair of sisters, two popular burlesque
dancers of their day. They gained a fair bit of notoriety when the fountain was completed;
the church tried for months to prevent the thing from being unveiled because it was
too sexy. The sisters lived well into old age, and even as late as the 1920s these two dignified
old ladies could be seen walking together every day into the piazza to have a look at their
fountain. And every year, once a year, for as long as he lived, the French sculptor who had
captured them in marble during their prime would come to Rome and take the sisters out to
lunch, where they would reminisce together about the days when they were all so young and
beautiful and wild.
So Giovanni parks there, and waits for me to get a hold of myself. All I can do is press the
heels of my palms against my eyes, trying to push the tears back in. We have never once had
a personal conversation, me and Giovanni. All these months, all these dinners together, all
we have ever talked about is philosophy and art and culture and politics and food. We know
nothing of each others private lives. He does not even know that I am divorced or that I have
left love behind in America. I do not know a thing about him except that he wants to be a
writer and that he was born in Naples. My crying, though, is about to force a whole new level
of conversation between these two people. I wish it wouldnt. Not under these dreadful circumstances.
He says, Im sorry, but I dont understand. Did you lose something today?
But Im still having trouble figuring out how to talk. Giovanni smiles and says encouragingly,
Parla come magni. He knows this is one of my favorite expressions in Roman dialect.
It means, Speak the way you eat, or, in my personal translation: Say it like you eat it.
Its a reminderwhen youre making a big deal out of explaining something, when youre
searching for the right wordsto keep your language as simple and direct as Roman food.
Dont make a big production out of it. Just lay it on the table.
I take a deep breath and offer a heavily abridged (yet somehow totally complete) Italian-language
version of my situation: Its about a love story, Giovanni. I had to say good-bye
to someone today.
Then my hands are slapped over my eyes again, tears spraying through my clamped fingers.
Bless his heart, Giovanni doesnt try to put a reassuring arm around me, nor does he
express the slightest discomfort about my explosion of sadness. Instead, he just sits through
my tears in silence, until Ive calmed down. At which point he speaks with perfect empathy,
choosing each word with care (as his English teacher, I was so proud of him that night!), saying
slowly and clearly and kindly: I understand, Liz. I have been there.
Eat, Pray, Love

 29


 My sisters arrival in Rome a few days later helped nudge my attention away from lingering
sadness over David and bring me back up to speed. My sister does everything fast, and energy
twists up around her in miniature cyclones. Shes three years older than me and three
inches taller than me. Shes an athlete and a scholar and a mother and a writer. The whole
time she was in Rome, she was training for a marathon, which means she would wake up at
dawn and run eighteen miles in the time it generally takes me to read one article in the newspaper
and drink two cappuccinos. She actually looks like a deer when she runs. When she
was pregnant with her first child, she swam across an entire lake one night in the dark. I
wouldnt join her, and I wasnt even pregnant. I was too scared. But my sister doesnt really
get scared. When she was pregnant with her second child, a midwife asked if Catherine had
any unspoken fears about anything that could go wrong with the babysuch as genetic defects
or complications during the birth. My sister said, My only fear is that he might grow up
to become a Republican.
Thats my sisters nameCatherine. Shes my one and only sibling. When we were growing
up in rural Connecticut, it was just the two of us, living in a farmhouse with our parents. No
other kids nearby. She was mighty and domineering, the commander of my whole life. I lived
in awe and fear of her; nobody elses opinion mattered but hers. I cheated at card games with
her in order to lose, so she wouldnt get mad at me. We were not always friends. She was annoyed
by me, and I was scared of her, I believe, until I was twenty-eight years old and got
tired of it. That was the year I finally stood up to her, and her reaction was something along
the lines of, What took you so long?
We were just beginning to hammer out the new terms of our relationship when my marriage
went into a skid. It would have been so easy for Catherine to have gained victory from
my defeat. Id always been the loved and lucky one, the favorite of both family and destiny.
The world had always been a more comfortable and welcoming place for me than it was for
my sister, who pressed so sharply against life and who was hurt by it fairly hard sometimes in
return. It would have been so easy for Catherine to have responded to my divorce and depression
with a: Ha! Look at Little Mary Sunshine now! Instead, she held me up like a cham-
pion. She answered the phone in the middle of the night whenever I was in distress and made
comforting noises. And she came along with me when I went searching for answers as to why
I was so sad. For the longest time, my therapy was almost vicariously shared by her. Id call
her after every session with a debriefing of everything Id realized in my therapists office, and
shed put down whatever she was doing and say, Ah . . . that explains a lot. Explains a lot
about both of us, that is.
Now we speak to each other on the phone almost every dayor at least we did, before I
moved to Rome. Before either of us gets on an airplane now, the one always calls the other
and says, I know this is morbid, but I just wanted to tell you that I love you. You know . . . just
in case . . . And the other one always says, I know . . . just in case.
She arrives in Rome prepared, as ever. She brings five guidebooks, all of which she has
read already, and she has the city pre-mapped in her head. She was completely oriented before
she even left Philadelphia. And this is a classic example of the differences between us. I
am the one who spent my first weeks in Rome wandering about, 90 percent lost and 100 percent
happy, seeing everything around me as an unexplainable beautiful mystery. But this is
how the world kind of always looks to me. To my sisters eyes, there is nothing which cannot
be explained if one has access to a proper reference library. This is a woman who keeps The
Columbia Encyclopedia in her kitchen next to the cookbooksand reads it, for pleasure.
Theres a game I like to play with my friends sometimes called Watch This! Whenever
anybodys wondering about some obscure fact (for instance: Who was Saint Louis?) I will
say, Watch this! then pick up the nearest phone and dial my sisters number. Sometimes Ill
catch her in the car, driving her kids home from school in the Volvo, and she will muse: Saint
Louis . . . well, he was a hairshirt-wearing French king, actually, which is interesting because .
. .
So my sister comes to visit me in Romein my new cityand then shows it to me. This is
Rome, Catherine-style. Full of facts and dates and architecture that I do not see because my
mind does not work in that way. The only thing I ever want to know about any place or any
person is the story, this is the only thing I watch fornever for aesthetic details. (Sofie came
to my apartment a month after Id moved into the place and said, Nice pink bathroom, and
this was the first time Id noticed that it was, indeed, pink. Bright pink, from floor to ceiling,
bright pink tile everywhereI honestly hadnt seen it before.) But my sisters trained eye picks
up the Gothic, or Romanesque, or Byzantine features of a building, the pattern of the church
floor, or the dim sketch of the unfinished fresco hidden behind the altar. She strides across
Rome on her long legs (we used to call her Catherine-of-the-Three-Foot-Long-Femurs) and
I hasten after her, as I have since toddlerhood, taking two eager steps to her every one.
See, Liz? she says, See how they just slapped that nineteenth-century faade over that
brickwork? I bet if we turn the corner well find . . . yes! . . . see, they did use the original Roman
monoliths as supporting beams, probably because they didnt have the manpower to
move them . . . yes, I quite like the jumble-sale quality of this basilica. . . .
Catherine carries the map and her Michelin Green Guide, and I carry our picnic lunch (two
of those big softball-sized rolls of bread, spicy sausage, pickled sardines wrapped around
meaty green olives, a mushroom pt that tastes like a forest, balls of smoked mozzarella,
peppered and grilled arugula, cherry tomatoes, pecorino cheese, mineral water and a split of
cold white wine), and while I wonder when were going to eat, she wonders aloud, Why dont
people talk more about the Council of Trent?
She takes me into dozens of churches in Rome, and I cant keep them straightSt. This
and St. That, and St. Somebody of the Barefoot Penitents of Righteous Misery . . . but just because
I cannot remember the names or details of all these buttresses and cornices is not to
say that I do not love to be inside these places with my sister, whose cobalt eyes miss nothing.
I dont remember the name of the church that had those frescoes that looked so much
like American WPA New Deal heroic murals, but I do remember Catherine pointing them out
to me and saying, You gotta love those Franklin Roosevelt popes up there . . . I also remember
the morning we woke early and went to mass at St. Susanna, and held each others
hands as we listened to the nuns there chanting their daybreak Gregorian hymns, both of us
in tears from the echoing haunt of their prayers. My sister is not a religious person. Nobody in
my family really is. (Ive taken to calling myself the white sheep of the family.) My spiritual investigations
interest my sister mostly from a point of intellectual curiosity. I think that kind of
faith is so beautiful, she whispers to me in the church, but I cant do it, I just cant . . .
Heres another example of the difference in our worldviews. A family in my sisters neighborhood
was recently stricken with a double tragedy, when both the young mother and her
three-year-old son were diagnosed with cancer. When Catherine told me about this, I could
only say, shocked, Dear God, that family needs grace. She replied firmly, That family needs
casseroles, and then proceeded to organize the entire neighborhood into bringing that family
dinner, in shifts, every single night, for an entire year. I do not know if my sister fully recognizes
that this is grace.
We walk out of St. Susanna, and she says, Do you know why the popes needed city
planning in the Middle Ages? Because basically you had two million Catholic pilgrims a year
coming from all over the Western World to make that walk from the Vatican to St. John Lateransometimes
on their kneesand you had to have amenities for those people.
My sisters faith is in learning. Her sacred text is the Oxford English Dictionary. As she
bows her head in study, fingers speeding across the pages, she is with her God. I see my sis-
ter in prayer again later that same daywhen she drops to her knees in the middle of the Roman
Forum, clears away some litter off the face of the soil (as though erasing a blackboard),
then takes up a small stone and draws for me in the dirt a blueprint of a classic Romanesque
basilica. She points from her drawing to the ruin before her, leading me to understand (even
visually challenged me can understand!) what that building once must have looked like eighteen
centuries earlier. She sketches with her finger in the empty air the missing arches, the
nave, the windows long gone. Like Harold with his Purple Crayon, she fills in the absent cosmos
with her imagination and makes whole the ruined.
In Italian there is a seldom-used tense called the passato remoto, the remote past. You
use this tense when you are discussing things in the far, far distant past, things that happened
so long ago they have no personal impact whatsoever on you anymorefor example, ancient
history. But my sister, if she spoke Italian, would not use this tense to discuss ancient history.
In her world, the Roman Forum is not remote, nor is it past. It is exactly as present and close
to her as I am.
She leaves the next day.
Listen, I say, be sure to call me when your plane lands safely, OK? Not to be morbid,
but . . .
I know, sweetie, she says. I love you, too.
Eat, Pray, Love

 30


 I am so surprised sometimes to notice that my sister is a wife and a mother, and I am not.
Somehow I always thought it would be the opposite. I thought it would be me who would end
up with a houseful of muddy boots and hollering kids, while Catherine would be living by herself,
a solo act, reading alone at night in her bed. We grew up into different adults than anyone
might have foretold when we were children. Its better this way, though, I think. Against all
predictions, weve each created lives that tally with us. Her solitary nature means she needs a
family to keep her from loneliness; my gregarious nature means I will never have to worry
about being alone, even when I am single. Im happy that shes going back home to her family
and also happy that I have another nine months of traveling ahead of me, where all I have to
do is eat and read and pray and write.
I still cant say whether I will ever want children. I was so astonished to find that I did not
want them at thirty; the remembrance of that surprise cautions me against placing any bets on
how I will feel at forty. I can only say how I feel nowgrateful to be on my own. I also know
that I wont go forth and have children just in case I might regret missing it later in life; I dont
think this is a strong enough motivation to bring more babies onto the earth. Though I suppose
people do reproduce sometimes for that reasonfor insurance against later regret. I
think people have children for all manner of reasonssometimes out of a pure desire to nurture
and witness life, sometimes out of an absence of choice, sometimes in order to hold on
to a partner or create an heir, sometimes without thinking about it in any particular way. Not
all the reasons to have children are the same, and not all of them are necessarily unselfish.
Not all the reasons not to have children are the same, either, though. Nor are all those reasons
necessarily selfish.
I say this because Im still working out that accusation, which was leveled against me
many times by my husband as our marriage was collapsingselfishness. Every time he said
it, I agreed completely, accepted the guilt, bought everything in the store. My God, I hadnt
even had the babies yet, and I was already neglecting them, already choosing myself over
them. I was already a bad mother. These babiesthese phantom babiescame up a lot in
our arguments. Who would take care of the babies? Who would stay home with the babies?
Who would financially support the babies? Who would feed the babies in the middle of the
night? I remember saying once to my friend Susan, when my marriage was becoming intolerable,
I dont want my children growing up in a household like this. Susan said, Why dont
you leave those so-called children out of the discussion? They dont even exist yet, Liz. Why
cant you just admit that you dont want to live in unhappiness anymore? That neither of you
does. And its better to realize it now, by the way, than in the delivery room when youre at five
centimeters.
I remember going to a party in New York around that time. A couple, a pair of successful
artists, had just had a baby, and the mother was celebrating a gallery opening of her new
paintings. I remember watching this woman, the new mother, my friend, the artist, as she tried
to be hostess to this party (which was in her loft) at the same time as taking care of her infant
and trying to discuss her work professionally. I never saw somebody look so sleep-deprived in
my life. I can never forget the image of her standing in her kitchen after midnight, elbows-deep
in a sink full of dishes, trying to clean up after this event. Her husband (I am sorry
to report it, and I fully realize this is not at all representational of every husband) was in the
other room, feet literally on the coffee table, watching TV. She finally asked him if he would
help clean the kitchen, and he said, Leave it, honwell clean up in the morning. The baby
started crying again. My friend was leaking breast milk through her cocktail dress.
Almost certainly, other people who attended this party came away with different images
than I did. Any number of the other guests could have felt great envy for this beautiful woman
with her healthy new baby, for her successful artistic career, for her marriage to a nice man,
for her lovely apartment, for her cocktail dress. There were people at this party who would
probably have traded lives with her in an instant, given the chance. This woman herself probably
looks back on that eveningif she ever thinks of it at allas one tiring but totally worth-it
night in her overall satisfying life of motherhood and marriage and career. All I can say for myself,
though, is that I spent that whole party trembling in panic, thinking, If you dont recognize
that this is your future, Liz, then you are out of your mind. Do not let it happen.
But did I have a responsibility to have a family? Oh, Lordresponsibility. That word
worked on me until I worked on it, until I looked at it carefully and broke it down into the two
words that make its true definition: the ability to respond. And what I ultimately had to respond
to was the reality that every speck of my being was telling me to get out of my marriage.
Somewhere inside me an early-warning system was forecasting that if I kept trying to whiteknuckle
my way through this storm, I would end up getting cancer. And that if I brought children
into the world anyway, just because I didnt want to deal with the hassle or shame of revealing
some impractical facts about myselfthis would be an act of grievous irresponsibility.
In the end, though, I was most guided by something my friend Sheryl said to me that very
night at that very party, when she found me hiding in the bathroom of our friends fancy loft,
shaking in fear, splashing water on my face. Sheryl didnt know then what was going on in my
marriage. Nobody did. And I didnt tell her that night. All I could say was, I dont know what to
do. I remember her taking me by the shoulders and looking me in the eye with a calm smile
and saying simply, Tell the truth, tell the truth, tell the truth.
So thats what I tried to do.
Getting out of a marriage is rough, though, and not just for the legal/ financial complications
or the massive lifestyle upheaval. (As my friend Deborah once advised me wisely:
Nobody ever died from splitting up furniture.) Its the emotional recoil that kills you, the shock
of stepping off the track of a conventional lifestyle and losing all the embracing comforts that
keep so many people on that track forever. To create a family with a spouse is one of the
most fundamental ways a person can find continuity and meaning in American (or any) society.
I rediscover this truth every time I go to a big reunion of my mothers family in Minnesota
and I see how everyone is held so reassuringly in their positions over the years. First you are
a child, then you are a teenager, then you are a young married person, then you are a parent,
then you are retired, then you are a grandparentat every stage you know who you are, you
know what your duty is and you know where to sit at the reunion. You sit with the other children,
or teenagers, or young parents, or retirees. Until at last you are sitting with the ninetyyear-olds
in the shade, watching over your progeny with satisfaction. Who are you? No problemyoure
the person who created all this. The satisfaction of this knowledge is immediate,
and moreover, its universally recognized. How many people have I heard claim their children
as the greatest accomplishment and comfort of their lives? Its the thing they can always lean
on during a metaphysical crisis, or a moment of doubt about their relevancyIf I have done
nothing else in this life, then at least I have raised my children well.
But what if, either by choice or by reluctant necessity, you end up not participating in this
comforting cycle of family and continuity? What if you step out? Where do you sit at the reunion?
How do you mark times passage without the fear that youve just frittered away your
time on earth without being relevant? Youll need to find another purpose, another measure
by which to judge whether or not you have been a successful human being. I love children,
but what if I dont have any? What kind of person does that make me?
Virginia Woolf wrote, Across the broad continent of a womans life falls the shadow of a
sword. On one side of that sword, she said, there lies convention and tradition and order,
where all is correct. But on the other side of that sword, if youre crazy enough to cross it
and choose a life that does not follow convention, all is confusion. Nothing follows a regular
course.Her argument was that the crossing of the shadow of that sword may bring a far more
interesting existence to a woman, but you can bet it will also be more perilous.
Im lucky that at least I have my writing. This is something people can understand. Ah, she
left her marriage in order to preserve her art. Thats sort of true, though not completely so. A
lot of writers have families. Toni Morrison, just to name an example, didnt let the raising of
her son stop her from winning a little trinket we call the Nobel Prize. But Toni Morrison made
her own path, and I must make mine. The Bhagavad Gitathat ancient Indian Yogic
textsays that it is better to live your own destiny imperfectly than to live an imitation of
somebody elses life with perfection. So now I have started living my own life. Imperfect and
clumsy as it may look, it is resembling me now, thoroughly.
Anyway, I bring all this up only to admit thatin comparison to my sisters existence, to
her home and to her good marriage and to her childrenIm looking pretty unstable these
days. I dont even have an address, and thats kind of a crime against normality at this ripe old
age of thirty-four. Even at this very moment, all my belongings are stored in Catherines home
and shes given me a temporary bedroom on the top floor of her house (which we call The
Maiden Aunts Quarters, as it includes a garret window through which I can stare out at the
moors while dressed in my old wedding gown, grieving my lost youth). Catherine seems to be
fine with this arrangement, and its certainly convenient for me, but Im wary of the danger that
if I drift about this world randomly for too long, I may someday become The Family Flake. Or it
may have already happened. Last summer, my five-year-old niece had a little friend over to
my sisters house to play. I asked the child when her birthday was. She told me it was January
25.
Uh-oh! I said. Youre an Aquarius! Ive dated enough Aquarians to know that they are
trouble.
Both the five-year-olds looked at me with bewilderment and a bit of fearful uncertainty. I
had a sudden horrifying image of the woman I might become if Im not careful: Crazy Aunt Liz.
The divorce in the muumuu with the dyed orange hair who doesnt eat dairy but smokes
menthols, whos always just coming back from her astrology cruise or breaking up with her
aroma-therapist boyfriend, who reads the Tarot cards of kindergarteners and says things like,
Bring Aunty Liz another wine cooler, baby, and Ill let you wear my mood ring. . . .
Eventually I may have to become a more solid citizen again, Im aware of this.
But not yet . . . please. Not just yet.
Eat, Pray, Love

 31


 Over the next six weeks, I travel to Bologna, to Florence, to Venice, to Sicily, to Sardinia,
once more down to Naples, then over to Calabria. These are short trips, mostlya week
here, a weekend therejust the right amount of time to get the feel for a place, to look
around, to ask people on the street where the good food is and then to go eat it. I drop out of
my Italian language school, having come to feel that it was interfering with my efforts to learn
Italian, since it was keeping me stuck in the classroom instead of wandering around Italy,
where I could practice with people in person.
These weeks of spontaneous travel are such a glorious twirl of time, some of the loosest
days of my life, running to the train station and buying tickets left and right, finally beginning to
flex my freedom for real because it has finally sunk in that I can go wherever I want. I dont
see my friends in Rome for a while. Giovanni tells me over the phone, Sei una trottola
(Youre a spinning top). One night in a town somewhere on the Mediterranean, in a hotel
room by the ocean, the sound of my own laughter actually wakes me up the middle of my
deep sleep. I am startled. Who is that laughing in my bed? The realization that it is only me
just makes me laugh again. I cant remember now what I was dreaming. I think maybe it had
something to do with boats.
Eat, Pray, Love

 32


 Florence is just a weekend, a quick train ride up on a Friday morning to visit my Uncle
Terry and Aunt Deb, who have flown in from Connecticut to visit Italy for the first time in their
lives, and to see their niece, of course. It is evening when they arrive, and I take them on a
walk to look at the Duomo, always such an impressive sight, as evidenced by my uncles reaction:

Oy vey! he says, then pauses and adds, Or maybe thats the wrong word for praising a
Catholic church . . .
We watch the Sabines getting raped right there in the middle of the sculpture garden with
nobody doing a damn thing to stop it, and pay our respects to Michelangelo, to the science
museum, to the views from the hillsides around town. Then I leave my aunt and uncle to enjoy
the rest of their vacation without me, and I go on alone to wealthy, ample Lucca, that little
Tuscan town with its celebrated butcher shops, where the finest cuts of meat Ive seen in all
of Italy are displayed with a you know you want it sensuality in shops across town. Sausages
of every imaginable size, color and derivation are stuffed like ladies legs into provocative
stockings, swinging from the ceilings of the butcher shops. Lusty buttocks of hams hang in
the windows, beckoning like Amsterdams high-end hookers. The chickens look so plump and
contented even in death that you imagine they offered themselves up for sacrifice proudly,
after competing among themselves in life to see who could become the moistest and the fattest.
But its not just the meat thats wonderful in Lucca; its the chestnuts, the peaches, the
tumbling displays of figs, dear God, the figs . . .
The town is famous, too, of course, for having been the birthplace of Puccini. I know I
should probably be interested in this, but Im much more interested in the secret a local grocer
has shared with methat the best mushrooms in town are served in a restaurant across from
Puccinis birth-place. So I wander through Lucca, asking directions in Italian, Can you tell me
where is the house of Puccini? and a kind civilian finally leads me right to it, and then is probably
very surprised when I say Grazie, then turn on my heel and march in the exact opposite
direction of the museums entrance, entering a restaurant across the street and waiting out
the rain over my serving of risotto ai funghi.
I dont recall now if it was before or after Lucca that I went to Bolognaa city so beautiful
that I couldnt stop singing, the whole time I was there: My Bologna has a first name! Its P-RE-T-T-Y.
Traditionally Bolognawith its lovely brick architecture and famous wealthhas
been called The Red, The Fat and The Beautiful. (And, yes, that was an alternate title for
this book.) The food is definitely better here than in Rome, or maybe they just use more butter.
Even the gelato in Bologna is better (and I feel somewhat disloyal saying that, but its
true). The mushrooms here are like big thick sexy tongues, and the prosciutto drapes over
pizzas like a fine lace veil draping over a fancy ladys hat. And of course there is the Bolognese
sauce, which laughs disdainfully at any other idea of a rag.
It occurs to me in Bologna that there is no equivalent in English for the term buon appetito.
This is a pity, and also very telling. It occurs to me, too, that the train stops of Italy are a tour
through the names of the worlds most famous foods and wines: next stop, Parma . . . next
stop, Bologna . . . next stop, approaching Montepulciano . . . Inside the trains there is food,
too, of courselittle sandwiches and good hot chocolate. If its raining outside, its even nicer
to snack and speed along. For one long ride, I share a train compartment with a good-looking
young Italian guy who sleeps for hours through the rain as I eat my octopus salad. The guy
wakes up shortly before we arrive in Venice, rubs his eyes, looks me over carefully from foot
to head and pronounces under his breath: Carina. Which means: Cute.
 Grazie mille, I tell him with exaggerated politeness. A thousand thanks.
Hes surprised. He didnt realize I spoke Italian. Neither did I, actually, but we talk for
about twenty minutes and I realize for the first time that I do. Some line has been crossed and
Im actually speaking Italian now. Im not translating; Im talking. Of course, theres a mistake
in every sentence, and I only know three tenses, but I can communicate with this guy without
much effort. Me la cavo, is how you would say it in Italian, which basically means, I can get
by, but comes from the same verb you use to talk about uncorking a bottle of wine, meaning,
I can use this language to extract myself from tight situations.
Hes hitting on me, this kid! Its not entirely unflattering. Hes not entirely unattractive.
Though hes not remotely uncocky, either. At one point he says to me in Italian, meaning to
be complimentary, of course, Youre not too fat, for an American woman.
I reply in English, And youre not too greasy, for an Italian man.
 Come?

I repeat myself, in slightly modified Italian: And youre so gracious, just like all Italian
men.
I can speak this language! The kid thinks I like him, but its the words Im flirting with. My
GodI have decanted myself! I have uncorked my tongue, and Italian is pouring forth! He
wants me to meet him later in Venice, but I dont have the first interest in him. Im just lovesick
over the language, so I let him slide away. Anyhow, Ive already got a date in Venice. Im
meeting my friend Linda there.
Crazy Linda, as I like to call her, even though she isnt, is coming to Venice from Seattle,
another damp and gray town. She wanted to come see me in Italy, so I invited her along on
this leg of my trip because I refuseI absolutely declineto go to the most romantic city on
earth by myself, no, not now, not this year. I could just picture myself all alone, in the butt end
of a gondola, getting dragged through the mist by a crooning gondolier as I . . . read a
magazine? Its a sad image, rather like the idea of humping up a hill all by yourself on a bicycle-built-for-two.
So Linda will provide me with company, and good company, at that.
I met Linda (and her dreadlocks, and her piercings) in Bali almost two years ago, when I
went for that Yoga retreat. Since then, weve done a trip to Costa Rica together, too. Shes
one of my favorite traveling companions, an unflappable and entertaining and surprisingly organized
little pixie in tight red crushed-velvet pants. Linda is the owner of one of the worlds
more intact psyches, with an incomprehension for depression and a self-esteem that has never
even considered being anything but high. She said to me once, while regarding herself in a
mirror, Admittedly, I am not the one who looks fantastic in everything, but still I cannot help
loving myself. Shes got this ability to shut me up when I start fretting over metaphysical
questions, such as, What is the nature of the universe? (Lindas reply: My only question is:
Why ask?) Linda would like to someday grow her dreadlocks so long she could weave them
into a wire-supported structure on the top of her head like a topiary and maybe store a bird
there. The Balinese loved Linda. So did the Costa Ricans. When shes not taking care of her
pet lizards and ferrets, she is managing a software development team in Seattle and making
more money than any of us.
So we find each other there in Venice, and Linda frowns at our map of the city, turns it upside
down, locates our hotel, orients herself and announces with characteristic humility: We
are the mayors of this towns ass.
Her cheer, her optimismthey in no way match this stinky, slow, sinking, mysterious, silent,
weird city. Venice seems like a wonderful city in which to die a slow and alcoholic death,
or to lose a loved one, or to lose the murder weapon with which the loved one was lost in the
first place. Seeing Venice, Im grateful that I chose to live in Rome instead. I dont think I
would have gotten off the antidepressants quite so quick here. Venice is beautiful, but like a
Bergman movie is beautiful; you can admire it, but you dont really want to live in it.
The whole town is peeling and fading like those suites of rooms that once-rich families will
barricade away in the backs of their mansions when it gets too expensive to keep the maintenance
up and its easier to just nail the doors shut and forget about the dying treasures on
the other sidethis is Venice. Greasy streams of Adriatic backwash nudge up against the
long-suffering foundations of these buildings, testing the endurance of this fourteenth-century
science fair experimentHey, what if we built a city that sits in water all the time?
Venice is spooky under its grainy November skies. The city creaks and sways like a fishing
pier. Despite Lindas initial confidence that we can govern this town, we get lost every day,
and most especially at night, taking wrong turns toward dark corners that dead-end dangerously
and directly into canal water. One foggy night, we pass an old building that seems to actually
be groaning in pain. Not to worry, chirps Linda. Thats just Satans hungry maw. I
teach her my favorite Italian wordattraversiamo (lets cross over)and we backtrack
nervously out of there.
The beautiful young Venetian woman who owns the restaurant near where we are staying
is miserable with her fate. She hates Venice. She swears that everyone who lives in Venice
regards it as a tomb. Shed fallen in love once with a Sardinian artist, whod promised her another
world of light and sun, but had left her, instead, with three children and no choice but to
return to Venice and run the family restaurant. She is my age but looks even older than I do,
and I cant imagine the kind of man who could do that to a woman so attractive. (He was
powerful, she says, and I died of love in his shadow.) Venice is conservative. The woman
has had some affairs here, maybe even with some married men, but it always ends in sorrow.
The neighbors talk about her. People stop speaking when she walks into the room. Her mother
begs her to wear a wedding ring just for appearancessaying, Darling, this is not Rome,
where you can live as scandalously as you like. Every morning when Linda and I come for
breakfast and ask our sorrowful young/old Venetian proprietress about the weather report for
the day, she cocks the fingers of her right hand like a gun, puts it to her temple, and says,
More rain.
Yet I dont get depressed here. I can cope with, and even somehow enjoy, the sinking
melancholy of Venice, just for a few days. Somewhere in me I am able to recognize that this
is not my melancholy; this is the citys own indigenous melancholy, and I am healthy enough
these days to be able to feel the difference between me and it. This is a sign, I cannot help
but think, of healing, of the coagulation of my self. There were a few years there, lost in borderless
despair, when I used to experience all the worlds sadness as my own. Everything
sad leaked through me and left damp traces behind.
Anyhow, its hard to be depressed with Linda babbling beside me, trying to get me to buy
a giant purple fur hat, and asking of the lousy dinner we ate one night, Are these called Mrs.
Pauls Veal Sticks? She is a firefly, this Linda. In Venice in the Middle Ages there was once a
profession for a man called a codegaa fellow you hired to walk in front of you at night with a
lit lantern, showing you the way, scaring off thieves and demons, bringing you confidence and
protection through the dark streets. This is Lindamy temporary, special-order, travel-sized
Venetian codega.
Eat, Pray, Love

 33


 I step off the train a few days later to a Rome full of hot, sunny, eternal disorder,
whereimmediately upon walking out into the streetI can hear the soccer-stadium-like
cheers of a nearby manifestazione, another labor demonstration. What they are striking about
this time, my taxi driver cannot tell me, mainly because, it seems, he doesnt care.  Sti
cazzi, he says about the strikers. (Literal translation: These balls, or, as we might say: I
dont give a shit.) Its nice to be back. After the staid sobriety of Venice, its nice to be back
where I can see a man in a leopard-skin jacket walking past a pair of teenagers making out
right in the middle of the street. The city is so awake and alive, so dolled-up and sexy in the
sunshine.
I remember something that my friend Marias husband, Giulio, said to me once. We were
sitting in an outdoor caf, having our conversation practice, and he asked me what I thought
of Rome. I told him I really loved the place, of course, but somehow knew it was not my city,
not where Id end up living for the rest of my life. There was something about Rome that didnt
belong to me, and I couldnt quite figure out what it was. Just as we were talking, a helpful
visual aid walked by. It was the quintessential Roman womana fantastically maintained,
jewelry-sodden forty-something dame wearing four-inch heels, a tight skirt with a slit as long
as your arm, and those sunglasses that look like race cars (and probably cost as much). She
was walking her little fancy dog on a gem-studded leash, and the fur collar on her tight jacket
looked as if it had been made out of the pelt of her former little fancy dog. She was exuding
an unbelievably glamorous air of: You will look at me, but I will refuse to look at you. It was
hard to imagine she had ever, even for ten minutes of her life, not worn mascara. This woman
was in every way the opposite of me, who dresses in a style my sister refers to as Stevie
Nicks Goes to Yoga Class in Her Pajamas.
I pointed that woman out to Giulio, and I said, See, Giuliothat is a Roman woman.
Rome cannot be her city and my city, too. Only one of us really belongs here. And I think we
both know which one.
Giulio said, Maybe you and Rome just have different words.
What do you mean?
He said, Dont you know that the secret to understanding a city and its people is to
learnwhat is the word of the street?
Then he went on to explain, in a mixture of English, Italian and hand gestures, that every
city has a single word that defines it, that identifies most people who live there. If you could
read peoples thoughts as they were passing you on the streets of any given place, you would
discover that most of them are thinking the same thought. Whatever that majority thought
might bethat is the word of the city. And if your personal word does not match the word of
the city, then you dont really belong there.
Whats Romes word? I asked.
SEX, he announced.
But isnt that a stereotype about Rome?
No.
But surely there are some people in Rome thinking about other things than sex?
Giulio insisted: No. All of them, all day, all they are thinking about is SEX.
Even over at the Vatican?
Thats different. The Vatican isnt part of Rome. They have a different word over there.
Their word is POWER.
Youd think it would be FAITH.
Its POWER, he repeated. Trust me. But the word in Romeits SEX.
Now if you are to believe Giulio, that little wordSEXcobbles the streets beneath your
feet in Rome, runs through the fountains here, fills the air like traffic noise. Thinking about it,
dressing for it, seeking it, considering it, refusing it, making a sport and game out of itthats
all anybody is doing. Which would make a bit of sense as to why, for all its gorgeousness,
Rome doesnt quite feel like my hometown. Not at this moment in my life. Because SEX isnt
my word right now. It has been at other times of my life, but it isnt right now. Therefore,
Romes word, as it spins through the streets, just bumps up against me and tumbles off, leaving
no impact. Im not participating in the word, so Im not fully living here. Its a kooky theory,
impossible to prove, but I sort of like it.
Giulio asked, Whats the word in New York City?
I thought about this for a moment, then decided. Its a verb, of course. I think its
ACHIEVE.
(Which is subtly but significantly different from the word in Los Angeles, I believe, which is
also a verb: SUCCEED. Later, I will share this whole theory with my Swedish friend Sofie, and
she will offer her opinion that the word on the streets of Stockholm is CONFORM, which depresses
both of us.)
I asked Giulio, Whats the word in Naples? He knows the south of Italy well.
FIGHT, he decides. What was the word in your family when you were growing up?
That one was difficult. I was trying to think of a single word that somehow combines both
FRUGAL and IRREVERENT. But Giulio was already on to the next and most obvious question:
Whats your word?
Now that, I definitely could not answer.
And still, after a few weeks of thinking about it, I cant answer it any better now. I know
some words that it definitely isnt. Its not MARRIAGE, thats evident. Its not FAMILY (though
this was the word of the town Id lived in for a few years with my husband, and since I did not
fit with that word, this was a big cause of my suffering). Its not DEPRESSION anymore, thank
heavens. Im not concerned that I share Stockholms word of CONFORM. But I dont feel that
Im entirely inhabiting New York Citys ACHIEVE anymore, either, though that had indeed
been my word all throughout my twenties. My word might be SEEK. (Then again, lets be honestit
might just as easily be HIDE.) Over the last months in Italy, my word has largely been
PLEASURE, but that word doesnt match every single part of me, or I wouldnt be so eager to
get myself to India. My word might be DEVOTION, though this makes me sound like more of
a goody-goody than I am and doesnt take into account how much wine Ive been drinking.
I dont know the answer, and I suppose thats what this year of journeying is about. Finding
my word. But one thing I can say with all assuranceit aint SEX.
Or so I claim, anyhow. You tell me, then, why today my feet led me almost of their own accord
to a discreet boutique off the Via Condotti, whereunder the expert tutelage of the silky
young Italian shop girlI spent a few dreamy hours (and a transcontinental airline tickets
worth of money) buying enough lingerie to keep a sultans consort outfitted for 1,001 nights. I
bought bras of every shape and formation. I bought filmy, flimsy camisoles and sassy bits of
panty in every color of the Easter basket, and slips that came in creamy satins and hush-nowbaby
silks, and handmade little bits of string and things and basically just one velvety, lacy,
crazy valentine after another.
I have never owned things like this in my life. So why now? As I was walking out of the
store, hauling my cache of tissue-wrapped naughties under my arm, I suddenly thought of the
anguished demand Id heard a Roman soccer fan yell the other night at the Lazio game, when
Lazios star player Albertini at a critical moment had passed the ball right into the middle of
nowhere, for no reason whatsoever, totally blowing the play.
 Per chi??? the fan had shouted in near-madness. Per chi???
 For WHOM??? For whom are you passing this ball, Albertini? Nobodys there!
Out on the street after my delirious hours of lingerie shopping, I remembered this line and
repeated it to myself in a whisper: Per chi?
For whom, Liz? For whom all this decadent sexiness? Nobodys there. I had only a few
weeks left in Italy and absolutely no intention of knocking boots with anyone. Or did I? Had I
finally been affected by the word on the streets in Rome? Was this some final effort to become
Italian? Was this a gift to myself, or was it a gift for some as yet not even imagined lover?
Was this an attempt to start healing my libido after the sexual self-confidence disaster of
my last relationship?
I asked myself, You gonna bring all this stuff to India?
Eat, Pray, Love

 34


 Luca Spaghettis birthday falls this year on Americas Thanksgiving Day, so he wants to do
a turkey for his birthday party. Hes never eaten a big, fat, roasted American Thanksgiving turkey,
though hes seen them in pictures. He thinks it should be easy to replicate such a feast
(especially with the help of me, a real American). He says we can use the kitchen of his
friends Mario and Simona, who have a nice big house in the mountains outside Rome, and
who always host Lucas birthday parties.
So here was Lucas plan for the festivitieshe would pick me up at around seven oclock
at night, after hed finished work, and then we would drive north out of Rome for an hour or so
to his friends house (where we would meet the other attendees of the birthday party) and
wed drink some wine and all get to know each other, and then, probably around 9:00 PM, we
would commence to roasting a twenty-pound turkey . . .
I had to do some explaining to Luca about how much time it takes to roast a twenty-pound
turkey. I told him his birthday feast would probably be ready to eat, at that rate, around dawn
the next day. He was destroyed. But what if we bought a very small turkey? A just-born turkey?
I said, Lucalets make it easy and have pizza, like every other good dysfunctional
American family does on Thanksgiving.
But hes still sad about it. Though theres a general sadness around Rome right now, anyway.
The weather has turned cold. The sanitation workers and the train employees and the
national airline all went on strike on the same day. A study has just been released saying that
36 percent of Italian children have an allergy to the gluten needed to make pasta, pizza and
bread, so there goes Italian culture. Even worse, I recently saw an article with the shocking
headline: Insoddisfatte 6 Donne su 10! Meaning that six out of ten Italian women are sexually
unsatisfied. Moreover, 35 percent of Italian men are reporting difficulty maintaining
unerezione, leaving researchers feeling very perplessi indeed, and making me wonder if SEX
should be allowed to be Romes special word anymore, after all.
In more serious bad news, nineteen Italian soldiers have recently been killed in The Americans
War (as it is called here) in Iraqthe largest number of military deaths in Italy since
World War II. The Romans were shocked by these deaths and the city closed down the day
the boys were buried. The wide majority of Italians want nothing to do with George Bushs
war. The involvement was the decision of Silvio Berlusconi, Italys prime minister (more commonly
referred to around these parts as lidiota). This intellect-free, soccer-club-owning businessman,
with his oily film of corruption and sleaze, who regularly embarrasses his fellow citizens
by making lewd gestures in the European parliament, who has mastered the art of
speaking laria fritta (fried air), who expertly manipulates the media (not difficult when you
own it), and who generally behaves not at all like a proper world leader but rather like a Waterbury
mayor (thats an inside joke for Connecticut residents onlysorry), has now engaged
the Italians in a war they see as none of their business whatsoever.
They died for freedom, Berlusconi said at the funeral of the nineteen Italian soldiers, but
most Romans have a different opinion: They died for George Bushs personal vendetta. In
this political climate, one might think it would be difficult to be a visiting American. Indeed,
when I came to Italy, I expected to encounter a certain amount of resentment, but have received
instead empathy from most Italians. In any reference to George Bush, people only nod
to Berlusconi, saying, We understand how it iswe have one, too.
 Weve been there.

It is odd, then, that Luca would want to use this birthday to celebrate an American Thanksgiving,
given these circumstances, but I do like the idea of it. Thanksgiving is a nice holiday,
something an American can freely be proud of, our one national festival that has remained relatively
uncommodified. Its a day of grace and thanks and community andyespleasure. It
might be what we all need right now.
My friend Deborah has come to Rome from Philadelphia for the weekend, to celebrate the
holiday with me. Deborahs an internationally respected psychologist, a writer and a feminist
theorist, but I still think of her as my favorite regular customer, back from the days when I was
a diner waitress in Philly and she would come in for lunch and drink Diet Coke with no ice and
say clever things to me over the counter. She really classed up that joint. Weve been friends
now for over fifteen years. Sofie will be coming to Lucas party, too. Sofie and I have been
friends for about fifteen weeks. Everybody is always welcome on Thanksgiving. Especially
when it also happens to be Luca Spaghettis birthday.
We drive out of tired, stressed-out Rome late in the evening, up into the mountains. Luca
loves American music, so were blasting the Eagles and singing Take it . . . to the limit . . .
one more time!!!!!! which adds an oddly Californian sound track to our drive through olive
groves and ancient aqueducts. We arrive at the house of Lucas old friends Mario and Si-
mona, parents of the twin twelve-year-old girls Giulia and Sara. Paoloa friend of Lucas
whom Id met before at soccer gamesis there, too, along with his girlfriend. Of course,
Lucas own girlfriend, Giuliana, is there, as well, having driven up earlier in the evening. Its an
exquisite house, hidden away in a grove of olive and clementine and lemon trees. The fireplace
is lit. The olive oil is homemade.
No time to roast a twenty-pound turkey, obviously, but Luca sauts up some lovely cuts of
turkey breast and I preside over a whirlwind group effort to make a Thanksgiving stuffing, as
best as I can remember the recipe, made from the crumbs of some high-end Italian bread,
with necessary cultural substitutions (dates instead of apricots; fennel instead of celery).
Somehow it comes out great. Luca had been worried about how the conversation would proceed
tonight, given that half the guests cant speak English and the other half cant speak
Italian (and only Sofie can speak Swedish), but it seems to be one of those miracle evenings
where everyone can understand each other perfectly, or at least your neighbor can help
translate when the odd word gets lost.
I lose count of how many bottles of Sardinian wine we drink before Deborah introduces to
the table the suggestion that we follow a nice American custom here tonight by joining hands
andeach in turnsaying what we are most grateful for. In three languages, then, this montage
of gratitude comes forth, one testimony at a time.
Deborah starts by saying she is grateful that America will soon get a chance to pick a new
president. Sofie says (first in Swedish, then in Italian, then in English) that she is grateful for
the benevolent hearts of Italy and for these four months shes been allowed to experience
such pleasure in this country. The tears begin when Marioour hostweeps in open gratitude
as he thanks God for the work in his life that has enabled him to have this beautiful home
for his family and friends to enjoy. Paolo gets a laugh when he says that he, too, is grateful
that America will soon have the chance to elect a new president. We fall into a silence of collective
respect for little Sara, one of the twelve-year-old twins, when she bravely shares that
she is grateful to be here tonight with such nice people because shes been having a hard
time at school latelysome of the other students are being mean to herso thank you for
being sweet to me tonight and not mean to me, like they are. Lucas girlfriend says she is
grateful for the years of loyalty Luca has shown to her, and for how warmly he has taken care
of her family through difficult times. Simonaour hostesscries even more openly than her
husband had, as she expresses her gratitude that a new custom of celebration and thankfulness
has been brought into her home by these strangers from America, who are not really
strangers at all, but friends of Lucas and therefore friends of peace.
When it comes my turn to speak, I begin Sono grata . . . but then find I cannot say my
real thoughts. Namely, that I am so grateful to be free tonight from the depression that had
been gnawing at me like a rat over the years, a depression that had chewed such perforations
in my soul that I would not, at one time, have been able to enjoy even such a lovely night as
this. I dont mention any of this because I dont want to alarm the children. Instead, I say a
simpler truththat I am grateful for old and new friends. That I am grateful, most especially
tonight, for Luca Spaghetti. That I hope he has a happy thirty-third birthday, and I hope he
lives a long life, in order to stand as an example to other men of how to be a generous, loyal
and loving human being. And that I hope nobody minds that Im crying as I say all this, though
I dont think they do mind, since everyone else is crying, too.
Luca is so clutched by emotion that he cannot find words except to say to all of us: Your
tears are my prayers.
The Sardinian wine keeps on coming. And while Paolo washes the dishes and Mario puts
his tired daughters to bed and Luca plays the guitar and everyone sings drunken Neil Young
songs in various accents, Deborah the American feminist psychologist says quietly to me,
Look around at these good Italian men. See how open they are to their feelings and how lovingly
they participate in their families. See the regard and the respect they hold for the women
and children in their lives. Dont believe what you read in the papers, Liz. This country is doing
very well.
Our party doesnt end until almost dawn. We could have roasted that twenty-pound turkey,
after all, and eaten it for breakfast. Luca Spaghetti drives me and Deborah and Sofie all the
way back home. We try to help him stay awake as the sun comes up by singing Christmas
carols. Silent night, sainted night, holy night, we sing over and over in every language we
know, as we all head back into Rome together.
Eat, Pray, Love

 35


 I couldnt hold out. None of my pants, after almost four months in Italy, fit me anymore. Not
even the new clothes I just bought last month (when Id already outgrown my Second Month
in Italy pants) fit me anymore. I cant afford to buy a new wardrobe every few weeks, and I
am aware that soon I will be in India, where the pounds will just melt away, but stillI cannot
walk in these pants anymore. I cant stand it.
Which all makes sense, given that I recently stepped on a scale in a fancy Italian hotel
and learned that I have gained twenty-three pounds in my four months of Italya truly admirable
statistic. About fifteen pounds of that I actually needed to gain because I had become so
skeletal during these last hard years of divorce and depression. The next five pounds, I just
gained for fun. As for the final three? Just to prove a point, I suppose.
But so it is that I find myself shopping for an item of clothing I will always keep in my life as
a cherished souvenir: My Last Month in Italy Jeans. The young lady in the shop is nice
enough to keep bringing me bigger and bigger sizes, handing them through the curtain one
after another without commentary, only asking with concern each time if this is closer to a fit.
Several times, I have needed to poke my head out of this curtain and ask, Excuse medo
you have a pair that is slightly bigger? Until the nice young lady finally gives me a pair of
jeans with a waist measurement that verily hurts my eyes to witness. I step out of the dressing
room, presenting myself to the salesgirl.
She doesnt blink. She looks at me like an art curator trying to assess the value of a vase.
A rather large vase.
 Carina, she decides finally. Cute.
I ask her in Italian if she could please tell me honestly whether these jeans are causing me
to resemble a cow.
No, signorina, I am told. You do not resemble a cow.
Do I resemble a pig, then?
No, she assures me with great seriousness. Nor do I resemble a pig in the least.
Perhaps a buffalo?
This is becoming good vocabulary practice. Im also trying to get a smile out of the
salesclerk, but shes too intent on remaining professional.
I try one more time: Maybe I resemble a buffalo mozzarella?
Okay, maybe, she concedes, smiling only slightly. Maybe you do look a little like a buffalo
mozzarella . . .
Eat, Pray, Love

 36


 I have only a week left here. Im planning to go back to America for Christmas before flying
to India, not only because I cant stand the thought of spending Christmas without my family
but also because the next eight months of my journeyIndia and Indonesiarequire a complete
repacking of gear. Very little of the stuff you need when you are living in Rome is the
same stuff you need when you are wandering around India.
And maybe its in preparation for my trip to India that I decide to spend this last week traveling
through Sicilythe most third-world section of Italy, and therefore not a bad place to go
if you need to prepare yourself to experience extreme poverty. Or maybe I only want to go to
Sicily because of what Goethe said: Without seeing Sicily one cannot get a clear idea of what
Italy is.
But its not easy getting to or around Sicily. I have to use all my finding-out skills to find a
train that runs on Sunday all the way down the coast and then to find the correct ferryboat to
Messina (a scary and suspicious Sicilian port town that seems to howl from behind barricaded
doors, Its not my fault Im ugly! Ive been earthquaked and carpet-bombed and raped by the
Mafia, too!) Once Ive arrived in Messina, I have to find a bus station (grimy as a smokers
lung) and find the man whose job it is to sit there in the ticket booth, mourning his life, and see
if he will please sell me a ticket to the coastal town of Taormina. Then I rattle along the cliffs
and beaches of Sicilys stupendous and hard-edged east coast until I get to Taormina, and
then I have to find a taxi and then I have to find a hotel. Then I have to find the right person of
whom to ask my favorite question in Italian: Where is the best food in this town? In Taormina,
that person turns out to be a sleepy policeman. He gives me one of the greatest things
anyone can ever give me in lifea tiny piece of paper with the name of an obscure restaurant
written on it, a hand-drawn map of how to find the place.
Which turns out to be a little trattoria where the friendly elderly proprietress is getting
ready for her evenings customers by standing on a table in her stocking feet, trying not to
knock over the Christmas crche as she polishes the restaurant windows. I tell her that I dont
need to see the menu but could she just bring me the best food possible because this is my
first night in Sicily. She rubs her hands together in pleasure and yells something in Sicilian
dialect to her even-more-elderly mother in the kitchen, and within the space of twenty minutes
I am busily eating the hands-down most amazing meal Ive eaten yet in all of Italy. Its pasta,
but a shape of pasta Ive never before seenbig, fresh, sheets of pasta folded ravioli-like into
the shape (if not exactly the size) of the popes hat, stuffed with a hot, aromatic puree of crustaceans
and octopus and squid, served tossed like a hot salad with fresh cockles and strips of
julienned vegetables, all swimming in an olivey, oceany broth. Followed by the rabbit, stewed
in thyme.
But Syracuse, the next day, is even better. The bus coughs me up on a street corner here
in the cold rain, late in the day. I love this town immediately. There are three thousand years
of history under my feet in Syracuse. Its a place of such ancient civilization that it makes
Rome look like Dallas. Myth says that Daedalus flew here from Crete and that Hercules once
slept here. Syracuse was a Greek colony that Thucydides called a city not in the least inferior
to Athens itself. Syracuse is the link between ancient Greece and ancient Rome. Many great
playwrights and scientists of antiquity lived here. Plato thought it would be the ideal location
for a utopian experiment where perhaps by some divine fate rulers might become philosophers,
and philosophers might become rulers. Historians say that rhetoric was invented in Syracuse,
and also (and this is just a minor thing) plot.
I walk through the markets of this crumbly town and my heart tumbles with a love I cant
answer or explain as I watch an old guy in a black wool hat gut a fish for a customer (he has
stuck his cigarette in his lips for safekeeping the way a seamstress keeps her pins in her
mouth as she sews; his knife works with devotional perfection on the fillets). Shyly, I ask this
fisherman where I should eat tonight, and I leave our conversation clutching yet another little
piece of paper, directing me to a little restaurant with no name, whereas soon as I sit down
that nightthe waiter brings me airy clouds of ricotta sprinkled with pistachio, bread chunks
floating in aromatic oils, tiny plates of sliced meats and olives, a salad of chilled oranges
tossed in a dressing of raw onion and parsley. This is before I even hear about the calamari
house specialty.
No town can live peacefully, whatever its laws, Plato wrote, when its citizens . . . do
nothing but feast and drink and tire themselves out in the cares of love.
But is it such a bad thing to live like this for just a little while? Just for a few months of
ones life, is it so awful to travel through time with no greater ambition than to find the next
lovely meal? Or to learn how to speak a language for no higher purpose than that it pleases
your ear to hear it? Or to nap in a garden, in a patch of sunlight, in the middle of the day, right
next to your favorite fountain? And then to do it again the next day?
Of course, one cant live like this forever. Real life and wars and traumas and mortality will
interfere eventually. Here in Sicily with its dreadful poverty, real life is never far from anyones
mind. The Mafia has been the only successful business in Sicily for centuries (running the
business of protecting citizens from itself), and it still keeps its hand down everybodys pants.
Palermoa city Goethe once claimed was possessed of an impossible-to-describe
beautymay now be the only city in Western Europe where you can still find yourself picking
your steps through World War II rubble, just to give a sense of development here. The town
has been systematically uglified beyond description by the hideous and unsafe apartment
blocks the Mafia constructed in the 1980s as money-laundering operations. I asked one Sicilian
if those buildings were made from cheap concrete and he said, Oh, nothis is very expensive
concrete. In each batch, there are a few bodies of people who were killed by the
Mafia, and that costs money. But it does make the concrete stronger to be reinforced with all
those bones and teeth.
In such an environment, is it maybe a little shallow to be thinking only about your next
wonderful meal? Or is it perhaps the best you can do, given the harder realities? Luigi Barzini,
in his 1964 masterwork The Italians (written when hed finally grown tired of foreigners writing
about Italy and either loving it or hating it too much) tried to set the record straight on his own
culture. He tried to answer the question of why the Italians have produced the greatest artistic,
political and scientific minds of the ages, but have still never become a major world power.
Why are they the planets masters of verbal diplomacy, but still so inept at home government?
Why are they so individually valiant, yet so collectively unsuccessful as an army? How can
they be such shrewd merchants on the personal level, yet such inefficient capitalists as a nation?

His answers to these questions are more complex than I can fairly encapsulate here, but
have much to do with a sad Italian history of corruption by local leaders and exploitation by
foreign dominators, all of which has generally led Italians to draw the seemingly accurate conclusion
that nobody and nothing in this world can be trusted. Because the world is so corrupted,
misspoken, unstable, exaggerated and unfair, one should trust only what one can experience
with ones own senses, and this makes the senses stronger in Italy than anywhere in
Europe. This is why, Barzini says, Italians will tolerate hideously incompetent generals, presidents,
tyrants, professors, bureaucrats, journalists and captains of industry, but will never tolerate
incompetent opera singers, conductors, ballerinas, courtesans, actors, film directors,
cooks, tailors . . . In a world of disorder and disaster and fraud, sometimes only beauty can
be trusted. Only artistic excellence is incorruptible. Pleasure cannot be bargained down. And
sometimes the meal is the only currency that is real.
To devote yourself to the creation and enjoyment of beauty, then, can be a serious businessnot
always necessarily a means of escaping reality, but sometimes a means of holding
on to the real when everything else is flaking away into . . . rhetoric and plot. Not too long ago,
authorities arrested a brotherhood of Catholic monks in Sicily who were in tight conspiracy
with the Mafia, so who can you trust? What can you believe? The world is unkind and unfair.
Speak up against this unfairness and in Sicily, at least, youll end up as the foundation of an
ugly new building. What can you do in such an environment to hold a sense of your individual
human dignity? Maybe nothing. Maybe nothing except, perhaps, to pride yourself on the fact
that you always fillet your fish with perfection, or that you make the lightest ricotta in the whole
town?
I dont want to insult anyone by drawing too much of a comparison between myself and
the long-suffering Sicilian people. The tragedies in my life have been of a personal and largely
self-created nature, not epically oppressive. I went through a divorce and a depression, not a
few centuries of murderous tyranny. I had a crisis of identity, but I also had the resources
(financial, artistic and emotional) with which to try to work it out. Still, I will say that the same
thing which has helped generations of Sicilians hold their dignity has helped me begin to recover
minenamely, the idea that the appreciation of pleasure can be an anchor of ones humanity.
I believe this is what Goethe meant by saying that you have to come here, to Sicily, in
order to understand Italy. And I suppose this is what I instinctively felt when I decided that I
needed to come here, to Italy, in order to understand myself.
It was in a bathtub back in New York, reading Italian words aloud from a dictionary, that I
first started mending my soul. My life had gone to bits and I was so unrecognizable to myself
that I probably couldnt have picked me out of a police lineup. But I felt a glimmer of happiness
when I started studying Italian, and when you sense a faint potentiality for happiness
after such dark times you must grab onto the ankles of that happiness and not let go until it
drags you face-first out of the dirtthis is not selfishness, but obligation. You were given life;
it is your duty (and also your entitlement as a human being) to find something beautiful within
life, no matter how slight.
I came to Italy pinched and thin. I did not know yet what I deserved. I still maybe dont fully
know what I deserve. But I do know that I have collected myself of latethrough the enjoyment
of harmless pleasuresinto somebody much more intact. The easiest, most fundamentally
human way to say it is that I have put on weight. I exist more now than I did four months
ago. I will leave Italy noticeably bigger than when I arrived here. And I will leave with the hope
that the expansion of one personthe magnification of one lifeis indeed an act of worth in
this world. Even if that life, just this one time, happens to be nobodys but my own.
Eat, Pray, Love
Eat, Pray, Love

 37


 When I was growing up, my family kept chickens. We always had about a dozen of them at
any given time and whenever one died offtaken away by hawk or fox or by some obscure
chicken illnessmy father would replace the lost hen. Hed drive to a nearby poultry farm and
return with a new chicken in a sack. The thing is, you must be very careful when introducing a
new chicken to the general flock. You cant just toss it in there with the old chickens, or they
will see it as an invader. What you must do instead is to slip the new bird into the chicken
coop in the middle of the night while the others are asleep. Place her on a roost beside the
flock and tiptoe away. In the morning, when the chickens wake up, they dont notice the newcomer,
thinking only, She must have been here all the time since I didnt see her arrive. The
clincher of it is, awaking within this flock, the newcomer herself doesnt even remember that
shes a newcomer, thinking only, I must have been here the whole time . . .
This is exactly how I arrive in India.
My plane lands in Mumbai around 1:30 AM. It is December 30. I find my luggage, then find
the taxi that will take me hours and hours out of the city to the Ashram, located in a remote
rural village. I doze on the drive through nighttime India, sometimes waking to look out the
window, where I can see strange haunted shapes of thin women in saris walking alongside
the road with bundles of firewood on their heads. At this hour? Buses with no headlights pass
us, and we pass oxcarts. The banyan trees spread their elegant roots throughout the ditches.
We pull up to the front gate of the Ashram at 3:30 AM, right in front of the temple. As Im
getting out of the taxi, a young man in Western clothes and a wool hat steps out of the shadows
and introduces himselfhe is Arturo, a twenty-four-year-old journalist from Mexico and a
devotee of my Guru, and hes here to welcome me. As were exchanging whispered introductions,
I can hear the first familiar bars of my favorite Sanskrit hymn coming from inside. Its the
morning arati, the first morning prayer, sung every day at 3:30 AM as the Ashram wakes. I
point to the temple, asking Arturo, May I . . .? and he makes a be-my-guest gesture. So I
pay my taxi driver, tuck my backpack behind a tree, slip off my shoes, kneel and touch my
forehead to the temple step and then ease myself inside, joining the small gathering of mostly
Indian women who are singing this beautiful hymn.
This is the hymn I call The Amazing Grace of Sanskrit, filled with devotional longing. It is
the one devotional song I have memorized, not so much from effort as from love. I begin to
sing the familiar words in Sanskrit, from the simple introduction about the sacred teachings of
Yoga to the rising tones of worship (I adore the cause of the universe . . . I adore the one
whose eyes are the sun, the moon and fire . . . you are everything to me, O god of gods . . .)
to the last gemlike summation of all faith (This is perfect, that is perfect, if you take the perfect
from the perfect, the perfect remains).
The women finish singing. They bow in silence, then move out a side door across a dark
courtyard and into a smaller temple, barely lit by one oil lamp and perfumed with incense. I
follow them. The room is filled with devoteesIndian and Westernwrapped in woolen
shawls against the predawn cold. Everyone is seated in meditation, roosted there, you might
say, and I slip in beside them, the new bird in the flock, completely unnoticed. I sit crosslegged,
place my hands on my knees, close my eyes.
I have not meditated in four months. I have not even thought about meditating in four
months. I sit there. My breath quiets. I say the mantra to myself once very slowly and deliberately,
syllable by syllable.
 Om.

 Na.

 Mah.

 Shi.

 Va.

 Ya.

 Om Namah Shivaya.

 I honor the divinity that resides within me.

Then I repeat it again. Again. And again. Its not so much that Im meditating as unpacking
the mantra carefully, the way you would unpack your grandmothers best china if it had been
stored in a box for a long time, unused. I dont know if I fall asleep or if I drop into some kind
of spell or even how much time passes. But when the sun finally comes up that morning in India
and everyone opens their eyes and looks around, Italy feels ten thousand miles away
from me now, and it is as if I have been here in this flock forever.
Eat, Pray, Love

 38


 Why do we practice Yoga?
I had a teacher once ask that question during a particularly challenging Yoga class, back
in New York. We were all bent into these exhausting sideways triangles, and the teacher was
making us hold the position longer than any of us would have liked.
Why do we practice Yoga? he asked again. Is it so we can become a little bendier than
our neighbors? Or is there perhaps some higher purpose?
 Yoga, in Sanskrit, can be translated as union. It originally comes from the root word yuj,
which means to yoke, to attach yourself to a task at hand with ox-like discipline. And the
task at hand in Yoga is to find unionbetween mind and body, between the individual and
her God, between our thoughts and the source of our thoughts, between teacher and student,
and even between ourselves and our sometimes hard-to-bend neighbors. In the West, weve
mainly come to know Yoga through its now-famous pretzel-like exercises for the body, but
this is only Hatha Yoga, one limb of the philosophy. The ancients developed these physical
stretches not for personal fitness, but to loosen up their muscles and minds in order to prepare
them for meditation. It is difficult to sit in stillness for many hours, after all, if your hip is
aching, keeping you from contemplating your intrinsic divinity because you are too busy contemplating,
Wow . . . my hip really aches.
But Yoga can also mean trying to find God through meditation, through scholarly study,
through the practice of silence, through devotional service or through mantrathe repetition
of sacred words in Sanskrit. While some of these practices tend to look rather Hindu in their
derivation, Yoga is not synonymous with Hinduism, nor are all Hindus Yogis. True Yoga
neither competes with nor precludes any other religion. You may use your Yogayour disciplined
practices of sacred unionto get closer to Krishna, Jesus, Muhammad, Buddha or Yahweh.
During my time at the Ashram, I met devotees who identified themselves as practicing
Christians, Jews, Buddhists, Hindus and even Muslims. I have met others who would rather
not talk about their religious affiliation at all, for which, in this contentious world, you can
hardly blame them.
The Yogic path is about disentangling the built-in glitches of the human condition, which
Im going to over-simply define here as the heartbreaking inability to sustain contentment. Different
schools of thought over the centuries have found different explanations for mans apparently
inherently flawed state. Taoists call it imbalance, Buddism calls it ignorance, Islam
blames our misery on rebellion against God, and the Judeo-Christian tradition attributes all
our suffering to original sin. Freudians say that unhappiness is the inevitable result of the
clash between our natural drives and civilizations needs. (As my friend Deborah the psychologist
explains it: Desire is the design flaw.) The Yogis, however, say that human discontentment
is a simple case of mistaken identity. Were miserable because we think that we are
mere individuals, alone with our fears and flaws and resentments and mortality. We wrongly
believe that our limited little egos constitute our whole entire nature. We have failed to recognize
our deeper divine character. We dont realize that, somewhere within us all, there does
exist a supreme Self who is eternally at peace. That supreme Self is our true identity, universal
and divine. Before you realize this truth, say the Yogis, you will always be in despair, a notion
nicely expressed in this exasperated line from the Greek stoic philosopher Epictetus:
You bear God within you, poor wretch, and know it not.
Yoga is the effort to experience ones divinity personally and then to hold on to that experience
forever. Yoga is about self-mastery and the dedicated effort to haul your attention away
from your endless brooding over the past and your nonstop worrying about the future so that
you can seek, instead, a place of eternal presence from which you may regard yourself and
your surroundings with poise. Only from that point of even-mindedness will the true nature of
the world (and yourself) be revealed to you. True Yogis, from their seat of equipoise, see all
this world as an equal manifestation of Gods creative energymen, women, children,
turnips, bedbugs, coral: its all God in disguise. But the Yogis believe a human life is a very
special opportunity, because only in a human form and only with a human mind can Godrealization
ever occur. The turnips, the bedbugs, the coralthey never get a chance to find
out who they really are. But we do have that chance.
Our whole business therefore in this life, wrote Saint Augustine, rather Yogically, is to
restore to health the eye of the heart whereby God may be seen.
Like all great philosophical ideas, this one is simple to understand but virtually impossible
to imbibe. OKso we are all one, and divinity abides within us all equally. No problem. Understood.
But now try living from that place. Try putting that understanding into practice
twenty-four hours a day. Its not so easy. Which is why in India it is considered a given that
you need a teacher for your Yoga. Unless you were born one of those rare shimmering saints
who come into life already fully actualized, youre going to need some guidance along your
journey toward enlightenment. If youre lucky enough, you will find a living Guru. This is what
pilgrims have been coming to India to seek for ages. Alexander the Great sent an ambassador
to India in the fourth century BC, with a request to find one of these famous Yogis and return
with him to court. (The ambassador did report finding a Yogi, but couldnt convince the
gentleman to travel.) In the first century AD, Apollonius of Tyrana, another Greek ambassador,
wrote of his journey through India: I saw Indian Brahmans living upon the earth and yet
not on it, and fortified without fortifications, and possessing nothing, yet having the richness of
all men. Gandhi himself always wanted to study with a Guru, but never, to his regret, had the
time or opportunity to find one. I think there is a great deal of truth, he wrote, in the doctrine
that true knowledge is impossible without a Guru.
A great Yogi is anyone who has achieved the permanent state of enlightened bliss. A
Guru is a great Yogi who can actually pass that state on to others. The word Guru is composed
of two Sanskrit syllables. The first means darkness, the second means light. Out of
the darkness and into the light. What passes from the master into the disciple is something
called mantravirya: The potency of the enlightened consciousness. You come to your Guru,
then, not only to receive lessons, as from any teacher, but to actually receive the Gurus state
of grace.
Such transfers of grace can occur in even the most fleeting of encounters with a great being.
I once went to see the great Vietnamese monk, poet and peacemaker Thich Nhat Hanh
speak in New York. It was a characteristically hectic weeknight in the city, and as the crowd
pushed and shoved its way into the auditorium, the very air in the place was whisked into a
nerve-racking urgency of everyones collective stress. Then the monk came on stage. He sat
in stillness for a good while before he began to speak, and the audienceyou could feel it
happening, one row of high-strung New Yorkers at a timebecame colonized by his stillness.
Soon, there was not a flutter in the place. In the space of maybe ten minutes, this small Vietnamese
man had drawn every single one of us into his silence. Or maybe its more accurate
to say that he drew us each into our own silence, into that peace which we each inherently
possessed, but had not yet discovered or claimed. His ability to bring forth this state in all of
us, merely by his presence in the roomthis is divine power. And this is why you come to a
Guru: with the hope that the merits of your master will reveal to you your own hidden greatness.

The classical Indian sages wrote that there are three factors which indicate whether a soul
has been blessed with the highest and most auspicious luck in the universe:
1. To have been born a human being, capable of conscious inquiry.
2. To have been born withor to have developeda yearning to understand the nature of
the universe.
3. To have found a living spiritual master.
There is a theory that if you yearn sincerely enough for a Guru, you will find one. The universe
will shift, destinys molecules will get themselves organized and your path will soon intersect
with the path of the master you need. It was only one month after my first night of desperate
prayer on my bathroom floora night spent tearfully begging God for answersthat I
found mine, having walked into Davids apartment and encountered a photograph of this stunning
Indian woman. Of course, I was more than a bit ambivalent about the concept of having
a Guru. As a general rule, Westerners arent comfortable with that word. We have a kind of
sketchy recent history with it. In the 1970s a number of wealthy, eager, susceptible young
Western seekers collided with a handful of charismatic but dubious Indian Gurus. Most of the
chaos has settled down now, but the echoes of mistrust still resonate. Even for me, even after
all this time, I still find myself sometimes balking at the word Guru. This is not a problem for
my friends in India; they grew up with the Guru principle, theyre relaxed with it. As one young
Indian girl told me, Everybody in India almost has a Guru! I know what she meant to say
(that almost everyone in India has a Guru) but I related more to her unintentional statement,
because thats how I feel sometimeslike I almost have a Guru. Sometimes I just cant seem
to admit it because, as a good New Englander, skepticism and pragmatism are my intellectual
heritage. Anyhow, its not like I consciously went shopping for a Guru. She just arrived. And
the first time I saw her, it was as though she looked at me through her photographthose
dark eyes smoldering with intelligent compassionand she said, You called for me and now
Im here. So do you want to do this thing, or not?
Setting aside all nervous jokes and cross-cultural discomforts, I must always remember
what I replied that night: a straightforward and bottomless YES.
Eat, Pray, Love

 39


 One of my first roommates at the Ashram was a middle-aged African-American devout
Baptist and meditation instructor from South Carolina. My other roommates, over time, would
include an Argentinean dancer, a Swiss homeopath, a Mexican secretary, an Australian
mother of five, a young Bangladeshi computer programmer, a pediatrician from Maine and a
Filipino accountant. Others would come and go, too, as devotees cycled in and out of their
residencies.
This Ashram is not a place you can casually drop by and visit. First of all, its not wildly accessible.
Its located far away from Mumbai, on a dirt road in a rural river valley near a pretty
and scrappy little village (composed of one street, one temple, a handful of shops and a population
of cows who wander about freely, sometimes walking into the tailors shop and lying
down there). One evening I noticed a naked sixty-watt lightbulb hanging from a wire on a tree
in the middle of town; this is the towns one street-lamp. The Ashram essentially creates the
local economy, such as it is, and also stands as the towns pride. Outside the walls of the
Ashram, it is all dust and poverty. Inside, its all irrigated gardens, beds of flowers, hidden
orchids, birdsong, mango trees, jackfruit trees, cashew trees, palm trees, magnolias, banyans.
The buildings are nice, though not extravagant. Theres a simple dining hall, cafeteria-style.
Theres a comprehensive library of spiritual writings from the worlds religious traditions.
There are a few temples for different types of gatherings. There are two meditation
cavesdark and silent basements with comfortable cushions, open all day and night, to be
used only for meditation practice. Theres a covered outdoor pavilion, where Yoga classes are
held in the morning, and theres a kind of a park with an oval walking path around it, where
students can jog for exercise. Im sleeping in a concrete dormitory.
During my stay at the Ashram, there were never more than a few hundred residents at any
time. If the Guru herself had been in residence, those numbers would have swollen considerably,
but she was never in India when I was there. Id sort of expected that; shed been
spending a fair bit of time lately in America, but you never knew when she might show up anywhere
by surprise. Its not considered essential to be in her literal presence in order to keep
up your studies with her. There is, of course, the irreplaceable high of actually being around a
living Yogic master, and Ive experienced that before. But many longtime devotees agree that
it can also sometimes be a distractionif youre not careful, you can get all caught up in the
celebrity buzz of excitement that surrounds the Guru and lose the focus of your true intention.
Whereas, if you just go to one of her Ashrams and discipline yourself to keep to the austere
schedule of practices, you will sometimes find that it is easier to communicate with your
teacher from within these private meditations than to push your way through crowds of eager
students and get a word in edgewise in person.
There are some long-term paid staffers at the Ashram, but most of the work here is done
by the students themselves. Some of the local villagers also work here on salary. Other locals
are devotees of the Guru and live here as students. One teenage Indian boy around the
Ashram somehow really provoked my fascination. There was something about his (pardon
the word, but . . .) aura that was so compelling to me. For one thing, he was incredibly skinny
(though this is a fairly typical sight around here; if theres anything in this world skinnier than
an Indian teenage boy, Id be afraid to see it). He dressed the way the computer-interested
boys in my junior high school used to dress for band concertsdark trousers and an ironed
white button-down shirt that was far too big for him, his thin, stemlike neck sticking out of the
opening like a single daisy popping out of a giant flowerpot. His hair was always combed
neatly with water. He wore an older mans belt wrapped almost twice around what had to be a
sixteen-inch waist. He wore the same clothes every day. This was his only outfit, I realized.
He must have been washing his shirt by hand every night and ironing it in the mornings.(Though
this attention to polite dress is also typical around here; the Indian teenagers
with their starched outfits quickly shamed me out of my wrinkled peasant dresses and put me
into tidier, more modest clothes.) So what was it about this kid? Why was I so moved every
time I saw his facea face so drenched with luminescence it looked like hed just come back
from a long vacation in the Milky Way? I finally asked another Indian teenager who he was.
She replied matter-of-factly: This is the son of one of the local shopkeepers. His family is
very poor. The Guru invited him to stay here. When he plays the drums, you can hear Gods
voice.
There is one temple in the Ashram that is open to the general public, where many Indians
come throughout the day to pay tribute to a statue of the Siddha Yogi (or perfected master)
who established this lineage of teaching back in the 1920s and who is still revered across India
as a great saint. But the rest of the Ashram is for students only. Its not a hotel or a tourist
location. Its more like a university. You must apply to come here, and in order to be accepted
for a residency, you must show that youve been studying this Yoga seriously for a good long
while. A minimum stay of one month is required. (Ive decided to stay here for six weeks, and
then to travel around India on my own, exploring other temples, Ashrams and devotional
sites.)
The students here are about equally divided between Indians and Westerners (and the
Westerners are about evenly divided between Americans and Europeans). Courses are
taught in both Hindi and English. On your application, you must write an essay, gather references,
and answer questions about your mental and physical health, about any possible history
of drug or alcohol abuse and also about your financial stability. The Guru doesnt want
people to use her Ashram as an escape from whatever bedlam they may have created in their
real lives; this will not benefit anyone. She also has a general policy that if your family and
loved ones for some reason deeply object to the idea of your following a Guru and living in an
Ashram, then you shouldnt do it, its not worth it. Just stay home in your normal life and be a
good person. Theres no reason to make a big dramatic production over this.
The level of this womans practical sensibilities are always comforting to me.
To come here, then, you must demonstrate that you are also a sensible and practical human
being. You must show that you can work because youll be expected to contribute to the
overall operation of the place with about five hours a day of seva, or selfless service. The
Ashram management also asks, if you have gone through a major emotional trauma in the
last six months (divorce; death in the family) that you please postpone your visit to another
time because chances are you wont be able to concentrate on your studies, and, if you have
a meltdown of some sort, youll only bring distraction to your fellow students. I just made the
post-divorce cutoff myself. And when I think of the mental anguish I was going through right
after I left my marriage, I have no doubt that I would have been a great drain on everyone at
this Ashram had I come here at that moment. Far better to have rested first in Italy, gotten my
strength and health back, and then showed up. Because I will need that strength now.
They want you to come here strong because Ashram life is rigorous. Not just physically,
with days that begin at 3:00 AM and end at 9:00 PM, but also psychologically. Youre going to
be spending hours and hours a day in silent meditation and contemplation, with little distraction
or relief from the apparatus of your own mind. You will be living in close quarters with
strangers, in rural India. There are bugs and snakes and rodents. The weather can be extremesometimes
torrents of rain for weeks on end, sometimes 100 degrees in the shade
before breakfast. Things can get deeply real around here, very fast.
My Guru always says that only one thing will happen when you come to the Ashramthat
you will discover who you really are. So if youre hovering on the brink of madness already,
shed really rather you didnt come at all. Because, frankly, nobody wants to have to carry you
out of this place with a wooden spoon clenched between your teeth.
Eat, Pray, Love

 40


 My arrival coincides nicely with the arrival of a new year. I have barely one day to get myself
oriented to the Ashram, and then it is already New Years Eve. After dinner, the small
courtyard starts to fill with people. We all sit on the groundsome of us on the cool marble
floor and some on grass mats. The Indian women have all dressed as though for a wedding.
Their hair is oiled and dark and braided down their backs. They are wearing their finest silk
saris and gold bracelets, and each woman has a brightly jeweled bindi in the center of her
forehead, like a dim echo of the starlight above us. The plan is to chant outside in this courtyard
until midnight, until the year changes over.
 Chanting is a word I do not love for a practice that I love dearly. To me, the word chant connotes
a kind of dronelike and scary monotony, like something male druids would do around a
sacrificial fire. But when we chant here at the Ashram, its a kind of angelic singing. Generally,
its done in a call-and-response manner. A handful of young men and women with the loveliest
voices begin by singing one harmonious phrase, and the rest of us repeat it. Its a meditative
practicethe effort is to hold your attention on the musics progression and blend your
voice together with your neighbors voice so that eventually all are singing as one. Im jetlagged
and afraid it will be impossible for me to stay awake until midnight, much less to find
the energy to sing for so long. But then this evening of music begins, with a single violin in the
shadows playing one long note of longing. Then comes the harmonium, then the slow drums,
then the voices . . .
Im sitting in the back of the courtyard with all the mothers, the Indian women who are so
comfortably cross-legged, their children sleeping across them like little human lap rugs. The
chant tonight is a lullaby, a lament, an attempt at gratitude, written in a raga (a tune) that is
meant to suggest compassion and devotion. We are singing in Sanskrit, as always (an ancient
language that is extinct in India, except for prayer and religious study), and Im trying to
become a vocal mirror for the voices of the lead singers, picking up their inflections like little
strings of blue light. They pass the sacred words to me, I carry the words for a while, then
pass the words back, and this is how we are able to sing for miles and miles of time without
tiring. All of us are swaying like kelp in the dark sea current of night. The children around me
are wrapped in silks, like gifts.
Im so tired, but I dont drop my little blue string of song, and I drift into such a state that I
think I might be calling Gods name in my sleep, or maybe I am only falling down the well
shaft of this universe. By 11:30, though, the orchestra has picked up the tempo of the chant
and kicked it up into sheer joy. Beautifully dressed women in jingly bracelets are clapping and
dancing and attempting to tambourine with their whole bodies. The drums are slamming,
rhythmic, exciting. As the minutes pass, it feels to me like we are collectively pulling the year
2004 toward us. Like we have roped it with our music, and now we are hauling it across the
night sky like its a massive fishing net, brimming with all our unknown destinies. And what a
heavy net it is, indeed, carrying as it does all the births, deaths, tragedies, wars, love stories,
inventions, transformations and calamities that are destined for all of us this coming year. We
keep singing and we keep hauling, hand-over-hand, minute-by-minute, voice after voice,
closer and closer. The seconds drop down to midnight and we sing with our biggest effort yet
and in this last brave exertion we finally pull the net of the New Year over us, covering both
the sky and ourselves with it. God only knows what the year might contain, but now it is here,
and we are all beneath it.
This is the first New Years Eve I can ever remember in my life where I havent known any
of the people I was celebrating with. In all this dancing and singing, there is nobody for me to
embrace at midnight. But I wouldnt say that anything about this night has been lonely.
No, I would definitely not say that.
Eat, Pray, Love

 41


 We are all given work here, and it turns out that my work assignment is to scrub the temple
floors. So thats where you can find me for several hours a day nowdown on my knees on
the cold marble with a brush and a bucket, working away like a fairy-tale stepsister. (By the
way, Im aware of the metaphorthe scrubbing clean of the temple that is my heart, the polishing
of my soul, the everyday mundane effort that must be applied to spiritual practice in order
to purify the self, etc., etc.)
My fellow floor-scrubbers are mainly a bunch of Indian teenagers. They always give teenagers
this job because it requires high physical energy but not enormous reserves of responsibility;
theres a limit to how much damage you can do if you mess up. I like my coworkers.
The girls are fluttery little butterflies who seem so much younger than American eighteen-year-old
girls, and the boys are serious little autocrats who seem so much older than
American eighteen-year-old boys. Nobodys supposed to talk in the temples, but these are
teenagers, so theres a constant chatter going on all the time as were working. Its not all idle
gossip. One of the boys spends all day scrubbing beside me, lecturing me earnestly on how
to best perform my work here: Take seriously. Make punctual. Be cool and easy. Remembereverything
you do, you do for God. And everything God does, He do for you.
Its tiring physical labor, but my daily hours of work are considerably easier than my daily
hours of meditation. The truth is, I dont think Im good at meditation. I know Im out of practice
with it, but honestly I was never good at it. I cant seem to get my mind to hold still. I mentioned
this once to an Indian monk, and he said, Its a pity youre the only person in the history
of the world who ever had this problem. Then the monk quoted to me from the Bhagavad
Gita, the most sacred ancient text of Yoga: Oh Krishna, the mind is restless, turbulent, strong
and unyielding. I consider it as difficult to subdue as the wind.
Meditation is both the anchor and the wings of Yoga. Meditation is the way. Theres a difference
between meditation and prayer, though both practices seek communion with the divine.
Ive heard it said that prayer is the act of talking to God, while meditation is the act of
listening. Take a wild guess as to which comes easier for me. I can prattle away to God about
all my feelings and my problems all the livelong day, but when it comes time to descend into
silence and listen . . . well, thats a different story. When I ask my mind to rest in stillness, it is
astonishing how quickly it will turn (1) bored, (2) angry, (3) depressed, (4) anxious or (5) all of
the above.
Like most humanoids, I am burdened with what the Buddhists call the monkey mindthe
thoughts that swing from limb to limb, stopping only to scratch themselves, spit and howl.
From the distant past to the unknowable future, my mind swings wildly through time, touching
on dozens of ideas a minute, unharnessed and undisciplined. This in itself is not necessarily a
problem; the problem is the emotional attachment that goes along with the thinking. Happy
thoughts make me happy, butwhoop!how quickly I swing again into obsessive worry,
blowing the mood; and then its the remembrance of an angry moment and I start to get hot
and pissed off all over again; and then my mind decides it might be a good time to start feeling
sorry for itself, and loneliness follows promptly. You are, after all, what you think. Your
emotions are the slaves to your thoughts, and you are the slave to your emotions.
The other problem with all this swinging through the vines of thought is that you are never
where you are. You are always digging in the past or poking at the future, but rarely do you
rest in this moment. Its something like the habit of my dear friend Susan, whowhenever
she sees a beautiful placeexclaims in near panic, Its so beautiful here! I want to come
back here someday! and it takes all of my persuasive powers to try to convince her that she
is already here. If youre looking for union with the divine, this kind of forward/backward whirling
is a problem. Theres a reason they call God a presencebecause God is right here, right
now. In the present is the only place to find Him, and now is the only time.
But to stay in the present moment requires dedicated one-pointed focus. Different meditation
techniques teach one-pointedness in different waysfor instance, by focusing your eyes
on a single point of light, or by observing the rise and fall of your breath. My Guru teaches
meditation with the help of a mantra, sacred words or syllables to be repeated in a focused
manner. Mantra has a dual function. For one thing, it gives the mind something to do. Its as if
youve given the monkey a pile of 10,000 buttons and said, Move these buttons, one at time,
into a new pile. This is a considerably easier task for the monkey than if you just plopped him
in a corner and asked him not to move. The other purpose of mantra is to transport you to another
state, rowboatlike, through the choppy waves of the mind. Whenever your attention gets
pulled into a cross-current of thought, just return to the mantra, climb back into the boat and
keep going. The great Sanskrit mantras are said to contain unimaginable powers, the ability
to row you, if you can stay with one, all the way to the shorelines of divinity.
Among my many, many problems with meditation is that the mantra I have been givenOm
Namah Shivayadoesnt sit comfortably in my head. I love the sound of it and I love
the meaning of it, but it does not glide me into meditation. It never has, not in the two years
Ive been practicing this Yoga. When I try to repeat Om Namah Shivaya in my head, it actually
gets stuck in my throat, making my chest clench tightly, making me nervous. I can never
match the syllables to my breathing.
I end up asking my roommate Corella about this one night. Im shy to admit to her how
much trouble I have keeping my mind focused on mantra repetition, but she is a meditation
teacher. Maybe she can help me. She tells me that her mind used to wander during meditation,
too, but that now her practice is the great, easy, transformative joy of her life.
Seems I just sit down and shut my eyes, she says, and all I have to do is think of the
mantra and I vanish right into heaven.
Hearing this, I am nauseated with envy. Then again, Corella has been practicing Yoga for
almost as many years as Ive been alive. I ask her if she can show me how exactly she uses
Om Namah Shivaya in her meditation practice. Does she take one inhale for every syllable?
(When I do this, it feels really interminable and annoying.) Or is it one word for every
breath?(But the words are all different lengths! So how do you even it out?) Or does she say
the whole mantra once on the inhale, then once again on the exhale? (Because when I try to
do that, it gets all speeded up and I get anxious.)
I dont know, Corella says. I just kind of . . . say it.
But do you sing it? I push, desperate now. Do you put a beat on it?
I just say it.
Can you maybe speak aloud for me the way you say it in your head when youre meditating?
Indulgently, my roommate closes her eyes and starts saying the mantra aloud, the way it
appears in her head. And, indeed, shes just . . . saying it. She says it quietly, normally, smiling
slightly. She says it a few times, in fact, until I get restless and cut her off.
But dont you get bored? I ask.
Ah, says Corella and opens her eyes, smiling. She looks at her watch. Ten seconds
have passed, Liz. Bored already, are we?
Eat, Pray, Love

 42


 The following morning, I arrive right on time for the 4:00 AM meditation session which always
starts the day here. We are meant to sit for an hour in silence, but I log the minutes as if
they are milessixty brutal miles that I have to endure. By mile/minute fourteen, my nerves
have started to go, my knees are breaking down and Im overcome with exasperation. Which
is understandable, given that the conversations between me and my mind during meditation
generally go something like this:
 Me: OK, were going to meditate now. Lets draw our attention to our breath and focus on
the mantra. Om Namah Shivaya. Om Namah Shiv
 Mind: I can help you out with this, you know!
 Me: OK, good, because I need your help. Lets go. Om Namah Shivaya. Om Namah Shi
 Mind: I can help you think of nice meditative images. Likehey, heres a good one. Imagine
you are a temple. A temple on an island! And the island is in the ocean!
 Me: Oh, that is a nice image.
 Mind: Thanks. I thought of it myself.
 Me: But what ocean are we picturing here?
 Mind: The Mediterranean. Imagine youre one of those Greek islands, with an old Greek
temple on it. No, never mind, thats too touristy. You know what? Forget the ocean. Oceans
are too dangerous. Heres a better ideaimagine youre an island in a lake, instead.
 Me: Can we meditate now, please? Om Namah Shiv
 Mind: Yes! Definitely! But try not to picture that the lake is covered with . . . what are those
things called
 Me: Jet Skis?
 Mind: Yes! Jet Skis! Those things consume so much fuel! Theyre really a menace to the
environment. Do you know what else uses a lot of fuel? Leaf blowers. You wouldnt think so,
but
 Me: OK, but lets MEDITATE now, please? Om Namah
 Mind: Right! I definitely want to help you meditate! And thats why were going to skip the
image of an island on a lake or an ocean, because thats obviously not working. So lets imagine
that youre an island in . . . a river!
 Me: Oh, you mean like Bannerman Island, in the Hudson River?
 Mind: Yes! Exactly! Perfect. Therefore, in conclusion, lets meditate on this imageenvision
that you are an island in a river.
All the thoughts that float by as youre meditating, these are just the rivers natural currents
and you can ignore them because you are an island.
 Me: Wait, I thought you said I was a temple.
 Mind: Thats right, sorry. Youre a temple on an island. In fact, you are both the temple and
the island.
 Me: Am I also the river?
 Mind: No, the river is just the thoughts.
 Me: Stop! Please stop! YOURE MAKING ME CRAZY!!!
 Mind (wounded): Sorry. I was only trying to help.
 Me:
 Om Namah Shivaya . . . Om Namah Shivaya . . . Om Namah Shivaya . . .

 Here there is a promising eight-second pause in thoughts. But
 then

 Mind: Are you mad at me now?
and then with a big gasp, like I am coming up for air, my mind wins, my eyes fly open
and I quit. In tears. An Ashram is supposed to be a place where you come to deepen your
meditation, but this is a disaster. The pressure is too much for me. I cant do it. But what
should I do? Run out of the temple crying after fourteen minutes, every day?
This morning, though, instead of fighting it, I just stopped. I gave up. I let myself slump
against the wall behind me. My back hurt, I had no strength, my mind was quivering. My posture
collapsed like a bridge crumbling down. I took the mantra off the top of my head (where it
had been pressing down on me like an invisible anvil) and set it on the floor beside me. And
then I said to God, Im really sorry, but this is the closest I could get to you today.
The Lakota Sioux say that a child who cannot sit still is a half-developed child. And an old
Sanskrit text says, By certain signs you can tell when meditation is being rightly performed.
One of them is that a bird will sit on your head, thinking you are an inert thing. This has not
exactly happened to me yet. But for the next forty minutes or so, I tried to stay as quiet as
possible, trapped in that meditation hall and ensnared in my own shame and inadequacy,
watching the devotees around me as they sat in their perfect postures, their perfect eyes
closed, their smug faces emanating calmness as they surely transported themselves into
some perfect heaven. I was full of a hot, powerful sadness and would have loved to burst into
the comfort of tears, but tried hard not to, remembering something my Guru once saidthat
you should never give yourself a chance to fall apart because, when you do, it becomes a
tendency and it happens over and over again. You must practice staying strong, instead.
But I didnt feel strong. My body ached in diminished worthlessness.
I wondered who is the me when I am conversing with my mind, and who is the mind. I
thought about the relentless thought-processing, soul-devouring machine that is my brain,
and wondered how on earth I was ever going to master it. Then I remembered that line from
Jaws and couldnt help smiling:
Were gonna need a bigger boat.
Eat, Pray, Love

 43


 Dinnertime. Im sitting alone, trying to eat slowly. My Guru is always encouraging us to
practice discipline when it comes to eating. She encourages us to eat in moderation and
without desperate gulps, to not extinguish the sacred fires of our bodies by dumping too much
food into our digestive tracts too fast. (My Guru, Im fairly certain, has never been to Naples.)
When students come to her complaining that theyre having trouble meditating, she always
asks how their digestion has been lately. It only stands to reason that youll have trouble gliding
lightly into transcendence when your guts are struggling to churn through a sausage
calzone, a pound of buffalo wings and half a coconut cream pie. Which is why they dont
serve that kind of stuff here. The food at the Ashram is vegetarian, light and healthy. But still
delicious. Which is why its difficult for me not to wolf it down like a starving orphan. Plus,
meals are served buffet-style, and it never has been easy for me to resist taking a second or
third turn at-bat when beautiful food is just lying out there in the open, smelling good and costing
nothing.
So Im sitting at the dinner table all by myself, making an effort to restrain my fork, when I
see a man walk over with his dinner tray, looking for an open chair. I nod to him that he is welcome
to join me. I havent seen this guy around here yet. He must be a new arrival. The
strangers got a cool, aint-no-big-hurry kind of walk, and he moves with the authority of a border
town sheriff, or maybe a lifelong high-rolling poker player. He looks like hes in his fifties,
but walks like hes lived a few centuries longer than that. Hes got white hair and a white
beard and a plaid flannel shirt. Wide shoulders and giant hands that look like they could do
some damage, but a totally relaxed face.
He sits down across from me and drawls, Man, they got mosquitoes round this place big
enough to rape a chicken.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Richard from Texas has arrived.
Eat, Pray, Love

 44


 Among the many jobs that Richard from Texas has held in his lifeand I know Im leaving
a lot of them outare oil-field worker; eighteen-wheeler truck driver; the first authorized dealer
of Birkenstocks in the Dakotas; sack-shaker in a midwestern landfill (Im sorry, but I really
dont have time to explain what a sack-shaker is); highway construction worker; used-car
salesman; soldier in Vietnam; commodities broker (that commodity generally being Mexican
narcotics); junkie and alcoholic (if you can call this a profession); then reformed junkie and alcoholic
(a much more respectable profession); hippie farmer on a commune; radio voice-over
announcer; and, finally, successful dealer in high-end medical equipment (until his marriage
fell apart and he gave the whole business to his ex and got left scratchin my broke white ass
again). Now he renovates old houses in Austin.
Never did have much of a career path, he says. Never could do anything but the hustle.
Richard from Texas is not a guy who worries about a lot of stuff. I wouldnt call him a neurotic
person, no sir. But I am a bit neurotic, and thats why Ive come to adore him. Richards
presence at this Ashram becomes my great and amusing sense of security. His giant ambling
confidence hushes down all my inherent nervousness and reminds me that everything really
is going to be OK. (And if not OK, then at least comic.) Remember the cartoon rooster Foghorn
Leghorn? Well, Richard is kind of like that, and I become his chatty little sidekick, the
Chickenhawk. In Richards own words: Me and Groceries, we steady be laughin the whole
damn time.
Groceries.
Thats the nickname Richard has given me. He bestowed it upon me the first night we
met, when he noticed how much I could eat. I tried to defend myself (I was purposefully eating
with discipline and intention!) but the name stuck.
Maybe Richard from Texas doesnt seem like a typical Yogi. Though my time in India has
cautioned me against deciding what a typical Yogi is. (Dont get me started on the dairy farmer
from rural Ireland I met here the other day, or the former nun from South Africa.) Richard
came to this Yoga through an ex-girlfriend, who drove him up from Texas to the Ashram in
New York to hear the Guru speak. Richard says, I thought the Ashram was the weirdest thing
I ever saw, and I was wondering where the room was where you have to give em all your
money and turn over the deed to your house and car, but that never did happen . . .
After that experience, which was about ten years ago, Richard found himself praying all
the time. His prayer was always the same. He kept begging God, Please, please, please
open my heart. That was all he wantedan open heart. And he would always finish the prayer
for an open heart by asking God, And please send me a sign when the event has occurred.
Now he says, recollecting that time, Be careful what you pray for, Groceries, cuz you
just might get it. After a few months of praying constantly for an open heart, what do you
think Richard got? Thats rightemergency open-heart surgery. His chest was literally
cracked open, his ribs cleaved away from each other to allow some daylight to finally reach
into his heart, as though God were saying, Hows that for a sign? So now Richard is always
cautious with his prayers, he tells me. Whenever I pray for anything these days, I always
wrap it up by saying, Oh, and God? Please be gentle with me, OK? 
What should I do about my meditation practice? I ask Richard one day, as hes watching
me scrub the temple floors. (Hes luckyhe works in the kitchen, doesnt even have to show
up there until an hour before dinner. But he likes watching me scrub the temple floors. He
thinks its funny.)
Why do you have to do anything about it, Groceries?
Because it stinks.
Says who?
I cant get my mind to sit still.
Remember what the Guru teaches usif you sit down with the pure intention to meditate,
whatever happens next is none of your business. So why are you judging your experience?
Because whats happening in my meditations cannot be the point of this Yoga.
Groceries, babyyou got no idea whats happening in there.
I never see visions, I never have transcendent experiences
You wanna see pretty colors? Or you wanna know the truth about yourself? Whats your
intention?
All I seem to do is argue with myself when I try to meditate.
Thats just your ego, trying to make sure it stays in charge. This is what your ego does. It
keeps you feeling separate, keeps you with a sense of duality, tries to convince you that
youre flawed and broken and alone instead of whole.
But how does that serve me?
It doesnt serve you. Your egos job isnt to serve you. Its only job is to keep itself in
power. And right now, your egos scared to death cuz its about to get downsized. You keep
up this spiritual path, baby, and that bad boys days are numbered. Pretty soon your ego will
be out of work, and your heartll be making all the decisions. So your egos fighting for its life,
playing with your mind, trying to assert its authority, trying to keep you cornered off in a holding
pen away from the rest of the universe. Dont listen to it.
How do you not listen to it?
Ever try to take a toy away from a toddler? They dont like that, do they? They start kicking
and screaming. Best way to take a toy away from a toddler is distract the kid, give him
something else to play with. Divert his attention. Instead of trying to forcefully take thoughts
out of your mind, give your mind something better to play with. Something healthier.
Like what?
Like love, Groceries. Like pure divine love.
Eat, Pray, Love

 45


 Going into that meditation cave every day is supposed to be this time of divine communion,
but Ive been walking in there lately flinching the way my dog used to flinch when she walked
into the vets office (knowing that no matter how friendly everybody might be acting now, this
whole thing was going to end with a sharp poke with a medical instrument). But after my last
conversation with Richard from Texas, Im trying a new approach this morning. I sit down to
meditate and I say to my mind, ListenI understand youre a little frightened. But I promise,
Im not trying to annihilate you. Im just trying to give you a place to rest. I love you.
The other day a monk told me, The resting place of the mind is the heart. The only thing
the mind hears all day is clanging bells and noise and argument, and all it wants is quietude.
The only place the mind will ever find peace is inside the silence of the heart. Thats where
you need to go.
Im trying a different mantra, too. Its one Ive had luck with in the past. Its simple, just two
syllables:
 Ham-sa.

In Sanskrit it means I am That.
The Yogis say that Ham-sa is the most natural mantra, the one we are all given by God
before birth. It is the sound of our own breath. Ham on the inhale, sa on the exhale. (Ham, by
the way, is pronounced softly, openly, like hahhhm, not like the meat you put on a sandwich.
And sa rhymes with Ahhhh . . .) As long as we live, every time we breathe in or out, we are
repeating this mantra. I am That. I am divine, I am with God, I am an expression of God, I am
not separate, I am not alone, I am not this limited illusion of an individual. Ive always found
Ham-sa easy and relaxing. Easier to meditate with than Om Namah Shivaya, thehow would
you say thisofficial mantra of this Yoga. But I was talking to this monk the other day and
he told me to go ahead and use Ham-sa if it helped my meditation. He said, Meditate on
whatever causes a revolution in your mind.
So Ill sit with it here today.
 Ham-sa.

I am That.
Thoughts come, but I dont pay much attention to them, other than to say to them in an almost
motherly manner, Oh, I know you jokers . . . go outside and play now . . . Mommys
listening to God.
 Ham-sa.

I am That.
I fall asleep for a while. (Or whatever. In meditation, you can never really be sure if what
you think is sleep is actually sleep; sometimes its just another level of consciousness.) When
I awake, or whatever, I can feel this soft blue electrical energy pulsing through my body, in
waves. Its a little alarming, but also amazing. I dont know what to do, so I just speak internally
to this energy. I say to it, I believe in you, and it magnifies, volumizes, in response. Its
frighteningly powerful now, like a kidnapping of the senses. Its humming up from the base of
my spine. My neck feels like it wants to stretch and twist, so I let it, and then Im sitting there
in the strangest positionperched upright like a good Yogi, but with my left ear pressed hard
against my left shoulder. I dont know why my head and neck want to do this, but Im not going
to argue with them; they are insistent. The pounding blue energy keeps pitching through
my body, and I can hear a sort of thrumming sound in my ears, and its so mighty now that I
actually cant deal with it anymore. It scares me so much that I say to it, Im not ready yet!
and snap open my eyes. It all goes away. Im back in a room again, back in my surroundings.
I look at my watch. Ive been hereor somewherefor almost an hour.
I am panting, literally panting.
Eat, Pray, Love

 46


 To understand what that experience was, what happened in there (by which I mean both
in the meditation cave and in me) brings up a topic rather esoteric and wildnamely, the
subject of kundalini shakti.
Every religion in the world has had a subset of devotees who seek a direct, transcendent
experience with God, excusing themselves from fundamentalist scriptural or dogmatic study
in order to personally encounter the divine. The interesting thing about these mystics is that,
when they describe their experiences, they all end up describing exactly the same occurrence.
Generally, their union with God occurs in a meditative state, and is delivered through
an energy source that fills the entire body with euphoric, electric light. The Japanese call this
energy ki, the Chinese Buddhists call it chi, the Balinese call it taksu, the Christians call it The
Holy Spirit, the Kalahari Bushmen call it n/um (their holy men describe it as a snakelike power
that ascends the spine and blows a hole in the head through which the gods then enter). The
Islamic Sufi poets called that God-energy The Beloved, and wrote devotional poems to it.
The Australian aborigines describe a serpent in the sky that descends into the medicine man
and gives him intense, otherworldly powers. In the Jewish tradition of Kabbalah this union
with the divine is said to occur through stages of spiritual ascension, with energy that runs up
the spine along a series of invisible meridians.
Saint Teresa of Avila, that most mystical of Catholic figures, described her union with God
as a physical ascension of light through seven inner mansions of her being, after which she
burst into Gods presence. She used to go into meditative trances so deep that the other nuns
couldnt feel her pulse anymore. She would beg her fellow nuns not to tell anyone what they
had witnessed, as it was a most extraordinary thing and likely to arouse considerable talk.
(Not to mention a possible interview with the Inquisitor.) The most difficult challenge, the saint
wrote in her memoirs, was to not stir up the intellect during meditation, for any thoughts of the
mindeven the most fervent prayerswill extinguish the fire of God. Once the troublesome
mind begins to compose speeches and dream up arguments, especially if these are clever, it
will soon imagine it is doing important work. But if you can surpass those thoughts, Teresa
explained, and ascend toward God, it is a glorious bewilderment, a heavenly madness, in
which true wisdom is acquired. Unknowingly echoing the poems of the Persian Sufi mystic
Hafiz, who demanded why, with a God so wildly loving, are we not all screaming drunks,
Teresa cried out in her autobiography that, if these divine experiences were mere madness,
then I beseech you, Father, let us all be mad!
Then, in the next sentences of her book, its like she catches her breath. Reading Saint
Teresa today, you can almost feel her coming out of that delirious experience, then looking
around at the political climate of medieval Spain (where she lived under one of the most repressive
religious tyrannies of history) and soberly, dutifully, apologizing for her excitement.
She writes, Forgive me if I have been very bold, and reiterates that all her idiot babbling
should be ignored because, of course, she is just a woman and a worm and despicable vermin,
etc., etc. You can almost see her smoothing back her nuns skirts and tucking away
those last loose strands of hairher divine secret a blazing, hidden bonfire.
In Indian Yogic tradition, this divine secret is called kundalini shakti and is depicted as a
snake who lies coiled at the base of the spine until it is released by a masters touch or by a
miracle, and which then ascends up through seven chakras, or wheels (which you might also
call the seven mansions of the soul), and finally through the head, exploding into union with
God. These chakras do not exist in the gross body, say the Yogis, so dont look for them
there; they exist only in the subtle body, in the body that the Buddhist teachers are referring to
when they encourage their students to pull forth a new self from the physical body the way
you pull a sword from its sheath. My friend Bob, who is both a student of Yoga and a neuroscientist,
told me that he was always agitated by this idea of the chakras, that he wanted to actually
see them in a dissected human body in order to believe they existed. But after a particularly
transcendent meditative experience, he came away with a new understanding of it. He
said, Just as there exists in writing a literal truth and a poetic truth, there also exists in a human
being a literal anatomy and a poetic anatomy. One, you can see; one, you cannot. One
is made of bones and teeth and flesh; the other is made of energy and memory and faith. But
they are both equally true.
I like it when science and devotion find places of intersection. I found an article in The
New York Times recently about a team of neurologists who had wired up a volunteer Tibetan
monk for experimental brain-scanning. They wanted to see what happens to a transcendent
mind, scientifically speaking, during moments of enlightenment. In the mind of a normal thinking
person, an electrical storm of thoughts and impulses whirls constantly, registering on a
brain scan as yellow and red flashes. The more angry or impassioned the subject becomes,
the hotter and deeper those red flashes burn. But mystics across time and cultures have all
described a stilling of the brain during meditation, and say that the ultimate union with God is
a blue light which they can feel radiating from the center of their skulls. In Yogic tradition, this
is called the blue pearl, and it is the goal of every seeker to find it. Sure enough, this Tibetan
monk, monitored during meditation, was able to quiet his mind so completely that no red or
yellow flashes could be seen. In fact, all the neurological energy of this gentleman pooled and
collected at last into the center of his brainyou could see it happening right there on the
monitorinto a small, cool, blue pearl of light. Just like the Yogis have always described.
This is the destination of the kundalini shakti.
In mystical India, as in many shamanistic traditions, kundalini shakti is considered a dangerous
force to play around with if you are unsupervised; the inexperienced Yogi could quite
literally blow his mind with it. You need a teachera Guruto guide you on this path, and
ideally a safe placean Ashramfrom which to practice. It is said to be the Gurus touch
(either literally in person, or through a more supernatural encounter, like a dream) which releases
the bound kundalini energy from its coil at the base of the spine and allows it to begin
journeying upward toward God. This moment of release is called shaktipat, divine initiation,
and it is the greatest gift of an enlightened master. After that touch, the student might still
labor for years toward enlightenment, but the journey has at least begun. The energy has
been freed.
I received shaktipat initiation two years ago, when I met my Guru for the first time, back in
New York. It was during a weekend retreat at her Ashram in the Catskills. To be honest, I felt
nothing special afterward. I was kind of hoping for a dazzling encounter with God, maybe
some blue lightning or a prophetic vision, but I searched my body for special effects and felt
only vaguely hungry, as usual. I remember thinking that I probably didnt have enough faith to
ever experience anything really wild like unleashed kundalini shakti. I remember thinking that I
was too brainy, not intuitive enough, and that my devotional path was probably going to be
more intellectual than esoteric. I would pray, I would read books, I would think interesting
thoughts, but I would probably never ascend into the kind of divine meditative bliss Saint
Teresa describes. But that was OK. I still loved devotional practice. Its just that kundalini
shakti wasnt for me.
The next day, though, something interesting did happen. We were all gathered with the
Guru once more. She led us into meditation, and in the middle of it all, I fell asleep (or
whatever the state was) and had a dream. In this dream, I was on a beach, at the ocean. The
waves were massive and terrifying and they were building fast. Suddenly, a man appeared
beside me. It was my Gurus own mastera great charismatic Yogi I will refer to here only as
Swamiji (which is Sanskrit for beloved monk). Swamiji had died in 1982. I knew him only
from photographs around the Ashram. Even through these photographsI must admitId
always found the guy to be a little too scary, a little too powerful, a little too much on fire for
my taste. Id been dodging the idea of him for a long time, and generally avoiding his gaze as
it stared down at me from the walls. He seemed overwhelming. He wasnt my kind of Guru. Id
always preferred my lovely, compassionate, feminine living master to this deceased (but still
fierce) character.
But now Swamiji was in my dream, standing beside me on the beach in all his power. I
was terrified. He pointed to the approaching waves and said sternly, I want you to figure out
a way to stop that from happening. Panicked, I whipped out a notebook and tried to draw inventions
that would stop the ocean waves from advancing. I drew massive seawalls and
canals and dams. All my designs were so stupid and pointless, though. I knew I was way out
of my league here (Im not an engineer!) but I could feel Swamiji watching me, impatient and
judgmental. Finally I gave up. None of my inventions were clever or strong enough to keep
those waves from breaking.
Thats when I heard Swamiji laugh. I looked up at this tiny Indian man in his orange robes,
and he was veritably busting a gut in laughter, bent over double in delight, wiping mirthful
tears from his eyes.
Tell me, dear one, he said, and he pointed out toward the colossal, powerful, endless,
rocking ocean. Tell me, if you would be so kindhow exactly were you planning on stopping
that?
Eat, Pray, Love

 47


 Two nights in a row now Ive had dreams of a snake entering my room. Ive read that this is
spiritually auspicious (and not just in Eastern religions; Saint Ignatius had serpent visions all
throughout his mystical experiences), but it doesnt make the snakes any less vivid or scary.
Ive been waking up sweating. Even worse, once I am awake, my mind has been two-timing
me again, betraying me into a state of panic like I havent felt since the worst of the divorce
years. My thoughts keep flying back to my failed marriage, and to all the attendant shame and
anger of that event. Worse, Im again dwelling on David. Im arguing with him in my mind, Im
mad and lonely and remembering every hurtful thing he ever said or did to me. Plus I cant
stop thinking about all our happiness together, the thrilling delirium when times were good. Its
all I can do not to jump out of this bed and call him from India in the middle of the night and
justI dont know whatjust hang up on him, probably. Or beg him to love me again. Or read
him such a ferocious indictment on all his character flaws.
Why is all this stuff coming up again now?
I know what they would say, all the old-timers at this Ashram. They would say this is perfectly
normal, that everyone goes through this, that intense meditation brings everything up,
that youre just clearing out all your residual demons . . . but Im in such an emotional state I
cant stand it and I dont want to hear anyones hippie theories. I recognize that everything is
coming up, thank you very much. Like vomit its coming up.
Somehow I manage to fall asleep again, lucky me, and I have another dream. No snakes
this time, but a rangy, evil dog who chases me and says, I will kill you. I will kill you and eat
you!
I wake up crying and shaking. I dont want to disturb my roommates, so I go hide in the
bathroom. The bathroom, always the bathroom! Heaven help me, but there I am in a bathroom
again, in the middle of the night again, weeping my heart out on the floor in loneliness.
Oh, cold worldI have grown so weary of you and all your horrible bathrooms.
When the crying doesnt stop, I go get myself a notebook and a pen (last refuge of a
scoundrel) and I sit once more beside the toilet. I open to a blank page and scrawl my nowfamiliar
plea of desperation:
I NEED YOUR HELP.
Then a long exhale of relief comes as, in my own handwriting, my own constant friend
(who is it?) commences loyally to my own rescue:
Im right here. Its OK. I love you. I will never leave you . . .
Eat, Pray, Love

 48


 The next mornings meditation is a disaster. Desperate, I beg my mind to please step aside
and let me find God, but my mind stares at me with steely power and says, I will never let
you pass me by.
That whole next day, in fact, Im so hateful and angry that I fear for the life of anyone who
crosses my path. I snap at this poor German woman because she doesnt speak English well
and she cant understand when I tell her where the bookstore is. Im so ashamed of my rage
that I go hide in (yet another!) bathroom and cry, and then Im so mad at myself for crying as I
remember my Gurus counsel not to fall apart all the time or else it becomes a habit . . . but
what does she know about it? Shes enlightened. She cant help me. She doesnt understand
me.
I dont want anyone to talk to me. I cant tolerate anyones face right now. I even manage
to dodge Richard from Texas for a while, but he eventually finds me at dinner and sits
downbrave manin my black smoke of self-loathing.
Whats got you all wadded up? he drawls, toothpick in mouth, as usual.
Dont ask, I say, but then I start talking and tell him every bit of it, concluding with, And
worst of all, I cant stop obsessing over David. I thought I was over him, but its all coming up
again.
He says, Give it another six months, youll feel better.
Ive already given it twelve months, Richard.
Then give it six more. Just keep throwin six months at it till it goes away. Stuff like this
takes time.
I exhale hotly through my nose, bull-like.
Groceries, Richard says, listen to me. Someday youre gonna look back on this moment
of your life as such a sweet time of grieving. Youll see that you were in mourning and your
heart was broken, but your life was changing and you were in the best possible place in the
world for itin a beautiful place of worship, surrounded by grace. Take this time, every
minute of it. Let things work themselves out here in India.
But I really loved him.
Big deal. So you fell in love with someone. Dont you see what happened? This guy
touched a place in your heart deeper than you thought you were capable of reaching, I mean
you got zapped, kiddo. But that love you felt, thats just the beginning. You just got a taste of
love. Thats just limited little rinky-dink mortal love. Wait till you see how much more deeply
you can love than that. Heck, Groceriesyou have the capacity to someday love the whole
world. Its your destiny. Dont laugh.
Im not laughing. I was actually crying. And please dont laugh at me now, but I think the
reason its so hard for me to get over this guy is because I seriously believed David was my
soul mate.
He probably was. Your problem is you dont understand what that word means. People
think a soul mate is your perfect fit, and thats what everyone wants. But a true soul mate is a
mirror, the person who shows you everything thats holding you back, the person who brings
you to your own attention so you can change your life. A true soul mate is probably the most
important person youll ever meet, because they tear down your walls and smack you awake.
But to live with a soul mate forever? Nah. Too painful. Soul mates, they come into your life
just to reveal another layer of yourself to you, and then they leave. And thank God for it. Your
problem is, you just cant let this one go. Its over, Groceries. Davids purpose was to shake
you up, drive you out of that marriage that you needed to leave, tear apart your ego a little bit,
show you your obstacles and addictions, break your heart open so new light could get in,
make you so desperate and out of control that you had to transform your life, then introduce
you to your spiritual master and beat it. That was his job, and he did great, but now its over.
Problem is, you cant accept that this relationship had a real short shelf life. Youre like a dog
at the dump, babyyoure just lickin at an empty tin can, trying to get more nutrition out of it.
And if youre not careful, that cans gonna get stuck on your snout forever and make your life
miserable. So drop it.
But I love him.
So love him.
But I miss him.
So miss him. Send him some love and light every time you think about him, and then
drop it. Youre just afraid to let go of the last bits of David because then youll really be alone,
and Liz Gilbert is scared to death of what will happen if shes really alone. But heres what you
gotta understand, Groceries. If you clear out all that space in your mind that youre using right
now to obsess about this guy, youll have a vacuum there, an open spota door-way. And
guess what the universe will do with that doorway? It will rush inGod will rush inand fill
you with more love than you ever dreamed. So stop using David to block that door. Let it go.
But I wish me and David could
He cuts me off. See, now thats your problem. Youre wishin too much, baby. You gotta
stop wearing your wishbone where your backbone oughtta be.
This line gives me the first laugh of the day.
Then I ask Richard, So how long will it be before all this grieving passes?
You want an exact date?
Yes.
Somethin you can circle on your calendar?
Yes.
Lemme tell you something, Groceriesyou got some serious control issues.
My rage at this statement consumes me like fire. Control issues? ME? I actually consider
slapping Richard for this insult. And then, from right down inside the intensity of my offended
outrage comes the truth. The immediate, obvious, laughable truth.
Hes totally right.
The fire passes out of me, fast as it came.
Youre totally right, I say.
I know Im right, baby. Listen, youre a powerful woman and youre used to getting what
you want out of life, and you didnt get what you wanted in your last few relationships and its
got you all jammed up. Your husband didnt behave the way you wanted him to and David
didnt either. Life didnt go your way for once. And nothing pisses off a control freak more than
life not goin her way.
Dont call me a control freak, please.
You have got control issues, Groceries. Come on. Nobody ever told you this before?
(Well . . . yeah. But the thing about divorcing someone is that you kind of stop listening to
all the mean stuff they say about you after a while.)
So I buck up and admit it. OK, I think youre probably right. Maybe I do have a problem
with control. Its just weird that you noticed. Because I dont think its that obvious on the surface.
I meanI bet most people cant see my control issues when they first look at me.
Richard from Texas laughs so hard he almost loses his toothpick.
They cant? HoneyRay Charles could see your control issues!
OK, I think Im done with this conversation now, thank you.
You gotta learn how to let go, Groceries. Otherwise youre gonna make yourself sick.
Never gonna have a good nights sleep again. Youll just toss and turn forever, beatin on
yourself for being such a fiasco in life. Whats wrong with me? How come I screw up all my relationships?
Why am I such a failure? Lemme guessthats probably what you were up at all
hours doin to yourself again last night.
All right, Richard, thats enough, I say. I dont want you walking around inside my head
anymore.
Shut the door, then, says my big Texas Yogi.
Eat, Pray, Love

 49


 When I was nine years old, going on ten, I experienced a true metaphysical crisis. Maybe
this seems young for such a thing, but I was always a precocious child. It all happened over
the summer between fourth and fifth grade. I was going to be turning ten years old in July,
and there was something about the transition from nine to tenfrom single digit to double digitsthat
shocked me into a genuine existential panic, usually reserved for people turning
fifty. I remember thinking that life was passing me by so fast. It seemed like only yesterday I
was in kindergarten, and here I was, about to turn ten. Soon I would be a teenager, then
middle-aged, then elderly, then dead. And everyone else was aging in hyperspeed, too.
Everybody was going to be dead soon. My parents would die. My friends would die. My cat
would die. My older sister was almost in high school already; I could remember her going off
to first grade only moments ago, it seemed, in her little knee socks, and now she was in high
school? Obviously it wouldnt be long before she was dead. What was the point of all this?
The strangest thing about this crisis was that nothing in particular had spurred it. No friend
or relative had died, giving me my first taste of mortality, nor had I read or seen anything particular
about death; I hadnt even read Charlottes Web yet. This panic I was feeling at age ten
was nothing less than a spontaneous and full-out realization of mortalitys inevitable march,
and I had no spiritual vocabulary with which to help myself manage it. We were Protestants,
and not even devout ones, at that. We said grace only before Christmas and Thanksgiving
dinner and went to church sporadically. My dad chose to stay home on Sunday mornings,
finding his devotional practice in farming. I sang in the choir because I liked singing; my pretty
sister was the angel in the Christmas pageant. My mother used the church as a headquarters
from which to organize good works of volunteer service for the community. But even in that
church, I dont remember there being a lot of talking about God. This was New England, after
all, and the word God tends to make Yankees nervous.
My sense of helplessness was overwhelming. What I wanted to do was pull some massive
emergency brake on the universe, like the brakes Id seen on the subways during our school
trip to New York City. I wanted to call a time out, to demand that everybody just STOP until I
could understand everything. I suppose this urge to force the entire universe to stop in its
tracks until I could get a grip on myself might have been the beginning of what my dear friend
Richard from Texas calls my control issues. Of course, my efforts and worry were futile. The
closer I watched time, the faster it spun, and that summer went by so quickly that it made my
head hurt, and at the end of every day I remember thinking, Another one gone, and bursting
into tears.
I have a friend from high school who now works with the mentally handicapped, and he
says his autistic patients have a particularly heartbreaking awareness of times passage, as if
they never got the mental filter that allows the rest of us to forget about mortality every once in
a while and just live. One of Robs patients always asks him the date at the beginning of every
day, and at the end of the day will ask, Robwhen will it be February fourth again? And before
Rob can answer, the guy shakes his head in sorrow and says, I know, I know, never
mind . . . not until next year, right?
I know this feeling all too intimately. I know the sad longing to delay the end of another
February 4. This sadness is one of the great trials of the human experiment. As far as we
know, we are the only species on the planet who have been given the giftor curse, perhapsof
awareness about our own mortality. Everything here eventually dies; were just the
lucky ones who get to think about this fact every day. How are you going to cope with this information?
When I was nine, I couldnt do a thing with it except cry. Later, over the years, my
hypersensitive awareness of times speed led me to push myself to experience life at a maximum
pace. If I were going to have such a short visit on earth, I had to do everything possible
to experience it now. Hence all the traveling, all the romances, all the ambition, all the pasta.
My sister had a friend who used to think that Catherine had two or three younger sisters, because
she was always hearing stories about the sister who was in Africa, the sister who was
working on a ranch in Wyoming, the sister who was the bartender in New York, the sister who
was writing a book, the sister who was getting marriedsurely this could not all be the same
person? Indeed, if I could have split myself into many Liz Gilberts, I would willingly have done
so, in order to not miss a moment of life. What am I saying? I did split myself into many Liz
Gilberts, all of whom simultaneously collapsed in exhaustion on a bathroom floor in the suburbs
one night, somewhere around the age of thirty.
I should say here that Im aware not everyone goes through this kind of metaphysical
crisis. Some of us are hardwired for anxiety about mortality, while some of us just seem more
comfortable with the whole deal. You meet lots of apathetic people in this world, of course,
but you also meet some people who seem to be able to gracefully accept the terms upon
which the universe operates and who genuinely dont seem troubled by its paradoxes and injustices.
I have a friend whose grandmother used to tell her, Theres no trouble in this world
so serious that it cant be cured with a hot bath, a glass of whiskey and the Book of Common
Prayer. For some people, thats truly enough. For others, more drastic measures are required.
And now I will mention my friend the dairy farmer from Irelandon the surface, a most unlikely
character to meet in an Indian Ashram. But Sean is one of those people like me who
were born with the itch, the mad and relentless urge to understand the workings of existence.
His little parish in County Cork didnt seem to have any of these answers, so he left the farm
in the 1980s to go traveling through India, looking for inner peace through Yoga. A few years
later, he returned home to the dairy farm in Ireland. He was sitting in the kitchen of the old
stone house with his fathera lifelong farmer and a man of few wordsand Sean was telling
him all about his spiritual discoveries in the exotic East. Seans father listened with mild interest,
watching the fire in the hearth, smoking his pipe. He didnt speak at all until Sean said,
Dathis meditation stuff, its crucial for teaching serenity. It can really save your life. It
teaches you how to quiet your mind.
His father turned to him and said kindly, I have a quiet mind already, son, then resumed
his gaze on the fire.
But I dont. Nor does Sean. Many of us dont. Many of us look into the fire and see only inferno.
I need to actively learn how to do what Seans father, it seems, was born knowinghow
to, as Walt Whitman once wrote, stand apart from the pulling and hauling . . .
amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary . . . both in and out of the game and
watching and wondering at it all. Instead of being amused, though, Im only anxious. Instead
of watching, Im always probing and interfering. The other day in prayer I said to God,
LookI understand that an unexamined life is not worth living, but do you think I could
someday have an unexamined lunch?
Buddhist lore has a story about the moments that followed the Buddhas transcendence
into enlightenment. Whenafter thirty-nine days of meditationthe veil of illusion finally fell
away and the true workings of the universe were revealed to the great master, he was reported
to have opened his eyes and said immediately, This cannot be taught. But then he
changed his mind, decided that he would go out into the world, after all, and attempt to teach
the practice of meditation to a small handful of students. He knew there would be only a meager
percentage of people who would be served by (or interested in) his teachings. Most of humanity,
he said, have eyes that are so caked shut with the dust of deception they will never
see the truth, no matter who tries to help them. A few others (like Seans Da, perhaps) are so
naturally clear-eyed and calm already that they need no instruction or assistance whatsoever.
But then there are those whose eyes are just slightly caked with dust, and who might, with the
help of the right master, be taught to see more clearly someday. The Buddha decided he
would become a teacher for the benefit of that minorityfor those of little dust.
I dearly hope that I am one of these mid-level dust-caked people, but I dont know. I only
know that I have been driven to find inner peace with methods that might seem a bit drastic
for the general populace. (For instance, when I told one friend back in New York City that I
was going to India to live in an Ashram and search for divinity, he sighed and said, Oh,
theres a part of me that so wishes I wanted to do that . . . but I really have no desire for it
whatsoever.) I dont know that I have much of a choice, though. I have searched frantically
for contentment for so many years in so many ways, and all these acquisitions and accomplishmentsthey
run you down in the end. Life, if you keep chasing it so hard, will drive you
to death. Timewhen pursued like a banditwill behave like one; always remaining one
county or one room ahead of you, changing its name and hair color to elude you, slipping out
the back door of the motel just as youre banging through the lobby with your newest search
warrant, leaving only a burning cigarette in the ashtray to taunt you. At some point you have
to stop because it wont. You have to admit that you cant catch it. That youre not supposed
to catch it. At some point, as Richard keeps telling me, you gotta let go and sit still and allow
contentment to come to you.
Letting go, of course, is a scary enterprise for those of us who believe that the world revolves
only because it has a handle on the top of it which we personally turn, and that if we
were to drop this handle for even a moment, wellthat would be the end of the universe. But
try dropping it, Groceries. This is the message Im getting. Sit quietly for now and cease your
relentless participation. Watch what happens. The birds do not crash dead out of the sky in
mid-flight, after all. The trees do not wither and die, the rivers do not run red with blood. Life
continues to go on. Even the Italian post office will keep limping along, doing its own thing
without youwhy are you so sure that your micromanagement of every moment in this whole
world is so essential? Why dont you let it be?
I hear this argument and it appeals to me. I believe in it, intellectually. I really do. But then
I wonderwith all my restless yearning, with all my hyped-up fervor and with this stupidly
hungry nature of minewhat should I do with my energy, instead?
That answer arrives, too:
 Look for God, suggests my Guru. Look for God like a man with his head on fire looks for
water.
Eat, Pray, Love

 50


 The next morning in meditation, all my caustic old hateful thoughts come up again. Im
starting to think of them as irritating telemarketers, always calling at the most inopportune moments.
What Im alarmed to find in meditation is that my mind is actually not that interesting a
place, after all. In actuality I really only think about a few things, and I think about them constantly.
I believe the official term is brooding. I brood about my divorce, and all the pain of
my marriage, and all the mistakes I made, and all the mistakes my husband made, and then
(and theres no return from this dark topic) I start brooding about David . . .
Which is getting embarrassing, to be quite honest. I meanhere I am in this sacred place
of study in the middle of India, and all I can think about is my ex-boyfriend? What am I, in
eighth grade?
And then I remember a story my friend Deborah the psychologist told me once. Back in
the 1980s, she was asked by the city of Philadelphia if she could volunteer to offer psychological
counseling to a group of Cambodian refugeesboat peoplewho had recently arrived
in the city. Deborah is an exceptional psychologist, but she was terribly daunted by this task.
These Cambodians had suffered the worst of what humans can inflict on each othergenocide,
rape, torture, starvation, the murder of their relatives before their eyes, then
long years in refugee camps and dangerous boat trips to the West where people died and
corpses were fed to sharkswhat could Deborah offer these people in terms of help? How
could she possibly relate to their suffering?
But dont you know, Deborah reported to me, what all these people wanted to talk
about, once they could see a counselor?
It was all: I met this guy when I was living in the refugee camp, and we fell in love. I
thought he really loved me, but then we were separated on different boats, and he took up
with my cousin. Now hes married to her, but he says he really loves me, and he keeps calling
me, and I know I should tell him to go away, but I still love him and I cant stop thinking about
him. And I dont know what to do . . .
This is what we are like. Collectively, as a species, this is our emotional landscape. I met
an old lady once, almost one hundred years old, and she told me, There are only two ques-
tions that human beings have ever fought over, all through history. How much do you love
me? And Whos in charge? Everything else is somehow manageable. But these two questions
of love and control undo us all, trip us up and cause war, grief and suffering. And both of
them, unfortunately (or maybe obviously), are what Im dealing with at this Ashram. When I sit
in my silence and look at my mind, it is only questions of longing and control that emerge to
agitate me, and this agitation is what keeps me from evolving forward.
When I tried this morning, after an hour or so of unhappy thinking, to dip back into my
meditation, I took a new idea with me: compassion. I asked my heart if it could please infuse
my soul with a more generous perspective on my minds workings. Instead of thinking that I
was a failure, could I perhaps accept that I am only a human beingand a normal one, at
that? The thoughts came up as usualOK, so it will beand then the attendant emotions
rose, too. I began feeling frustrated and judgmental about myself, lonely and angry. But then
a fierce response boiled up from somewhere in the deepest caverns of my heart, and I told
myself, I will not judge you for these thoughts.
My mind tried to protest, said, Yeah, but youre such a failure, youre such a loser, youll
never amount to anything
But suddenly it was like a lion was roaring from within my chest, drowning all this claptrap
out. A voice bellowed in me like nothing I had ever heard before. It was so internally, eternally
loud that I actually clamped my hand over my mouth because I was afraid that if I opened my
mouth and let this sound out, it would shake the foundations of buildings as far away as Detroit.
And this is what it roared:
 YOU HAVE NO IDEA HOW STRONG MY LOVE IS!!!!!!!!!
The chattering, negative thoughts in my mind scattered in the wind of this statement like
birds and jackrabbits and antelopesthey hightailed it out of there, terrified. Silence followed.
An intense, vibrating, awed silence. The lion in the giant savannah of my heart surveyed his
newly quiet kingdom with satisfaction. He licked his great chops once, closed his yellow eyes
and went back to sleep.
And then, in that regal silence, finallyI began to meditate on (and with) God.
Eat, Pray, Love

 51


 Richard from Texas has some cute habits. Whenever he passes me in the Ashram and notices
by my distracted face that my thoughts are a million miles away, he says, Hows David
doing?
Mind your own business, I always say. You dont know what Im thinking about, mister.
Of course, hes always right.
Another habit he has is to wait for me when I come out of the meditation hall because he
likes to see how wigged out and spazzy I look when I crawl out of there. Like Ive been wrestling
alligators and ghosts. He says hes never watched anybody fight so hard against herself. I
dont know about that, but its true that what goes on in that dark meditation room for me can
get pretty intense. The most fierce experiences come when I let go of some last fearful reserve
and permit a veritable turbine of energy to unleash itself up my spine. It amuses me
now that I ever dismissed these ideas of the kundalini shakti as mere myth. When this energy
rides through me, it rumbles like a diesel engine in low gear, and all it asks of me is this one
simple requestWould you kindly turn yourself inside out, so that your lungs and heart and
offal will be on the outside and the whole universe will be on the inside? And emotionally, will
you do the same? Time gets all screwy in this thunderous space, and I am takennumbed,
dumbed and stunnedto all sorts of worlds, and I experience every intensity of sensation:
fire, cold, hatred, lust, fear . . . When its all over, I wobble to my feet and stagger out into the
daylight in such a stateravenously hungry, desperately thirsty, randier than a sailor on a
three-day shore leave. Richard is usually there waiting for me, ready to start laughing. He always
teases me with the same line when he sees my confounded and exhausted face: Think
youll ever amount to anything, Groceries?
But this morning in meditation, after I heard the lion roar YOU HAVE NO IDEA HOW
STRONG MY LOVE IS, I came out of that meditation cave like a warrior queen. Richard didnt
even have time to ask if I thought Id ever amount to anything in this life before I looked him
eye to eye and said, I already have, mister.
Check you out, Richard said. This is cause for celebration. Come on, kiddoIll take
you into town, buy you a Thumbs-Up.
Thumbs-Up is an Indian soft drink, sort of like Coca-Cola, but with about nine times the
corn syrup and triple that of caffeine. I think it might have methamphetamines in it, too. It
makes me see double. A few times a week, Richard and I wander into town and share one
small bottle of Thumbs-Upa radical experience after the purity of vegetarian Ashram
foodalways being careful not to actually touch the bottle with our lips. Richards rule about
traveling in India is a sound one: Dont touch anything but yourself. (And, yes, that was also
a tentative title for this book.)
We have our favorite visits in town, always stopping to pay respects to the temple, and to
say hello to Mr. Panicar, the tailor, who shakes our hands and says, Congratulations to meet
you! every time. We watch the cows mill about enjoying their sacred status (I think they actually
abuse the privilege, lying right in the middle of the road just to drive home the point that
they are holy), and we watch the dogs scratch themselves like theyre wondering how the
heck they ever ended up here. We watch the women doing road work, busting up rocks under
the sweltering sun, swinging sledgehammers, barefoot, looking so strangely beautiful in their
jewel-colored saris and their necklaces and bracelets. They give us dazzling smiles which I
cant begin to understandhow can they be happy doing this rough work under such terrible
conditions? Why dont they all faint and die after fifteen minutes in the boiling heat with those
sledgehammers? I ask Mr. Panicar the tailor about it and he says its like this with the villagers,
that people in this part of the world were born to this kind of hard labor and work is all
they are used to.
Also, he adds casually, we dont live very long around here.
It is a poor village, of course, but not desperate by the standards of India; the presence
(and charity) of the Ashram and some Western currency floating around makes a significant
difference. Not that theres so much to buy here, though Richard and I like to look around in
all the shops that sell the beads and the little statues. There are some Kashmiri guysvery
shrewd salesmen, indeedwho are always trying to unload their wares on us. One of them
really came after me today, asking if madam would perhaps like to buy a fine Kashmiri rug for
her home?
This made Richard laugh. He enjoys, among other sports, making fun of me for being
homeless.
Save your breath, brother, he said to the rug salesman. This old girl aint got any floors
to put a rug on.
Undaunted, the Kashmiri salesman suggested, Then perhaps madam would like to hang
a rug on her wall?
See, now, said Richard, thats the thingshes a little short on walls these days, too.
But I have a brave heart! I piped up, in my own defense.
And other sterling qualities, added Richard, tossing me a bone for once in his life.
Eat, Pray, Love

 52


 The biggest obstacle in my Ashram experience is not meditation, actually. Thats difficult, of
course, but not murderous. Theres something even harder for me here. The murderous thing
is what we do every morning after meditation and before breakfast (my God, but these mornings
are long)a chant called the Gurugita. Richard calls it The Geet. I have so much
trouble with The Geet. I do not like it at all, never have, not since the first time I heard it sung
at the Ashram in upstate New York. I love all the other chants and hymns of this Yogic tradition,
but the Gurugita feels long, tedious, sonorous and insufferable. Thats just my opinion, of
course; other people claim to love it, though I cant fathom why.
The Gurugita is 182 verses long, for crying out loud (and sometimes I do), and each verse
is a paragraph of impenetrable Sanskrit. Together with the preamble chant and the wrap-up
chorus, the entire ritual takes about an hour and half to perform. This is before breakfast, remember,
and after we have already had an hour of meditation and a twenty-minute chanting
of the first morning hymn. The Gurugita is basically the reason you have to get up at 3:00 AM
around here.
I dont like the tune, and I dont like the words. Whenever I tell anyone around the Ashram
this, they say, Oh, but its so sacred! Yes, but so is the Book of Job, and I dont choose to
sing the thing aloud every morning before breakfast.
The Gurugita does have an impressive spiritual lineage; its an excerpt from a holy ancient
scripture of Yoga called the Skanda Purana, most of which has been lost, and little of which
has been translated out of Sanskrit. Like much of Yogic scripture, its written in the form of a
conversation, an almost Socratic dialogue. The conversation is between the goddess Parvati
and the almighty, all-encompassing god Shiva. Parvati and Shiva are the divine embodiment
of creativity (the feminine) and consciousness (the masculine). She is the generative energy
of the universe; he is its formless wisdom. Whatever Shiva imagines, Parvati brings to life. He
dreams it; she materializes it. Their dance, their union (their Yoga), is both the cause of the
universe and its manifestation.
In the Gurugita, the goddess is asking the god for the secrets of worldly fulfillment, and he
is telling her. It bugs me, this hymn. I had hoped my feelings about the Gurugita would
change during my stay at the Ashram. Id hoped that putting it in an Indian context would
cause me to learn how to love the thing. In fact, the opposite has happened. Over the few
weeks that Ive been here, my feelings about the Gurugita have shifted from simple dislike to
solid dread. Ive started skipping it and doing other things with my morning that I think are
much better for my spiritual growth, like writing in my journal, or taking a shower, or calling my
sister back in Pennsylvania and seeing how her kids are doing.
Richard from Texas always busts me for skipping out. I noticed you were absent from
The Geet this morning, hell say, and Ill say, I am communicating with God in other ways,
and hell say, By sleeping in, you mean?
But when I try to go to the chant, all it does is agitate me. I mean, physically. I dont feel
like Im singing it so much as being dragged behind it. It makes me sweat. This is very odd
because I tend to be one of lifes chronically cold people, and its cold in this part of India in
January before the sun comes up. Everyone else sits in the chant huddled in wool blankets
and hats to stay warm, and Im peeling layers off myself as the hymn drones on, foaming like
an overworked farm horse. I come out of the temple after the Gurugita and the sweat rises off
my skin in the cold morning air like foglike horrible, green, stinky fog. The physical reaction
is mild compared to the hot waves of emotion that rock me as I try to sing the thing. And I
cant even sing it. I can only croak it. Resentfully.
Did I mention that it has 182 verses?
So a few days ago, after a particularly yucky session of chanting, I decided to seek advice
from my favorite teacher around herea monk with a wonderfully long Sanskrit name which
translates as He Who Dwells in the Heart of the Lord Who Dwells Within His Own Heart.
This monk is American, in his sixties, smart and educated. He used to be a classical theater
professor at NYU, and he still carries himself with a rather venerable dignity. He took his monastic
vows almost thirty years ago. I like him because hes no-nonsense and funny. In a dark
moment of confusion about David, Id once confided my heartache to this monk. He listened
respectfully, offered up the most compassionate advice he could find, and then said, And
now Im kissing my robes. He lifted a corner of his saffron robes and gave a loud smack.
Thinking this was probably some super-arcane religious custom, I asked what he was doing.
He said, Same thing I always do whenever anyone comes to me for relationship advice. Im
just thanking God Im a monk and I dont have to deal with this stuff anymore.
So I knew I could trust him to let me speak frankly about my problems with the Gurugita.
We went for a walk in the gardens together one night after dinner, and I told him how much I
disliked the thing and asked if he could please excuse me from having to sing it anymore. He
immediately started laughing. He said, You dont have to sing it if you dont want to. Nobody
around here is ever going to make you do anything you dont want to do.
But people say its a vital spiritual practice.
It is. But Im not going to tell you that youre going to go to hell if you dont do it. The only
thing Ill tell you is that your Guru has been very clear about thisthe Gurugita is the one essential
text of this Yoga, and maybe the most important practice you can do, next to meditation.
If youre staying at the Ashram, she expects you to get up for the chant every morning.
Its not that I mind getting up early in the morning . . .
What is it, then?
I explained to the monk why I had come to dread the Gurugita, how tortuous it feels.
He said, Wowlook at you. Even just talking about it youre getting all bent out of shape.
It was true. I could feel cold, clammy sweat accumulating in my armpits. I asked, Cant I
use that time to do other practices, instead? I find sometimes that if I go to the meditation
cave during the Gurugita I can get a nice vibe going for meditation.
AhSwamiji wouldve yelled at you for that. He wouldve called you a chanting thief for
riding on the energy of everyone elses hard work. Look, the Gurugita isnt supposed to be a
fun song to sing. It has a different function. Its a text of unimaginable power. It is a mighty
purifying practice. It burns away all your junk, all your negative emotions. And I think its probably
having a positive effect on you if youre experiencing such strong emotions and physical
reactions while youre chanting it. This stuff can be painful, but its awfully beneficial.
How do you keep the motivation to stay with it?
Whats the alternative? To quit whenever something gets challenging? To futz around
your whole life, miserable and incomplete?
Did you really just say futz around?
Yes. Yes, I did.
What should I do?
You have to decide for yourself. But my advicesince you askedis that you stick to
chanting the Gurugita while youre here, especially because youre having such an extreme
reaction to it. If something is rubbing so hard against you, you can be sure its working on you.
This is what the Gurugita does. It burns away the ego, turns you into pure ash. Its supposed
to be arduous, Liz. It has power beyond what can be rationally understood. Youre only staying
at the Ashram another week, right? And then youre free to go traveling and have fun. So
just chant the thing seven more times, then you never have to do it again. Remember what
our Guru saysbe a scientist of your own spiritual experience. Youre not here as a tourist or
a journalist; youre here as a seeker. So explore it.
So youre not letting me off the hook?
You can let yourself off the hook anytime you want, Liz. Thats the divine contract of a
little something we call free will.
Eat, Pray, Love

 53


 So I went to the chant the next morning, all full of resolve, and the Gurugita kicked me
down a twenty-foot flight of cement stairsor anyway, thats how it felt. The following day it
was even worse. I woke up in a fury, and before I even got to the temple I was already sweating,
boiling, teeming. I kept thinking: Its only an hour and a halfyou can do anything for an
hour and a half. For Gods sake, you have friends who were in labor for fourteen hours . . .
But still, I could not have been less comfortable in this chair if I had been stapled to it. I kept
feeling fireballs of, like, menopausal heat pulsing over me, and I thought I might faint, or bite
somebody in my fury.
My anger was giant. It took in everyone in this world, but it was most specifically directed
at Swamijimy Gurus master, who had instituted this ritual chanting of the Gurugita in the
first place. This was not my first difficult encounter with the great and now-deceased Yogi. He
was the one who had come to me in my dream on the beach, demanding to know how I intended
to stop the tide, and I always felt like he was riding me.
Swamiji had been, all throughout his life, relentless, a spiritual fire-brand. Like Saint Francis
of Assisi, Swamiji had been born into a wealthy family and had been expected to enter the
family business. But when he was just a young boy, he met a holy man in a small village near
his, and had been deeply touched by the experience. Still in his teens, Swamiji left home in a
loincloth and spent years making pilgrimages to every holy spot in India, searching for a true
spiritual master. He was said to have met over sixty saints and Gurus, never finding the
teacher he wanted. He starved, wandered on foot, slept outside in Himalayan snowstorms,
suffered from malaria, dysenteryand called these the happiest years of his life, just searching
for somebody who would show God to him. Over those years, Swamiji became a Hatha
Yogi, an expert in ayurvedic medicine and cooking, an architect, a gardener, a musician and a
swordfighter (this I love). By his middle years, he had still not found a Guru, until one day he
encountered a naked, mad sage who told him to go back home, back to the village where he
had met the holy man as a child, and to study with that great saint.
Swamiji obeyed, returned home, and became the holy mans most devoted student, finally
achieving enlightenment through his masters guidance. Ultimately, Swamiji would become a
Guru himself. Over time, his Ashram in India grew from three rooms on a barren farm to the
lush garden it is today. Then he got the inspiration to go traveling and incite a worldwide meditation
revolution. He came to America in 1970 and blew everybodys mind. He gave divine
initiationshaktipatto hundreds and thousands of people a day. He had a power that was
immediate and transformative. The Reverend Eugene Callender (a respected civil rights leader,
a colleague of Martin Luther King Jr. and still the pastor of a Baptist church in Harlem) remembers
meeting Swamiji in the 1970s and dropping on his knees before the Indian man in
amazement and thinking to himself, Theres no time for shuckin and jivin now, this is it . . .
This man knows everything there is to know about you.
Swamiji demanded enthusiasm, commitment, self-control. He was always scolding people
for being jad, the Hindi word for inert. He brought ancient concepts of discipline to the lives
of his often rebellious young Western followers, commanding them to stop wasting their own
(and everyone elses) time and energy with their freewheeling hippie nonsense. He would
throw his walking stick at you one minute, hug you the next. He was complicated, often controversial,
but truly world-changing. The reason we have access now in the West to many ancient
Yogic scriptures is that Swamiji presided over the translation and revitalization of philosophical
texts that had long been forgotten even in much of India.
My Guru was Swamijis most devoted student. She was literally born to be his disciple; her
Indian parents were amongst his earliest followers. When she was only a child, she would often
chant for eighteen hours a day, tireless in her devotion. Swamiji recognized her potential,
and he took her on when she was still a teenager to be his translator. She traveled all over
the world with him, paying such close attention to her Guru, she said later, that she could
even feel him speaking to her with his knees. She became his successor in 1982, still in her
twenties.
All true Gurus are alike in the fact that they exist in a constant state of self-realization, but
external characteristics differ. The apparent differences between my Guru and her master are
vastshes a feminine, multilingual, university-educated and savvy professional woman; he
was a sometimes-capricious, sometimes-kingly South Indian old lion. For a nice New England
girl like me, it is easy to follow my living teacher, who is so reassuring in her proprietyexactly
the kind of Guru you could take home to meet Mom and Dad. But Swamiji . . . he
was such a wild card. And from the first time I came to this Yogic path and saw photographs
of him, and heard stories about him, Ive thought, Im just going to stay clear of this character.
Hes too big. He makes me nervous.
But now that I am here in India, here in the Ashram that was his home, Im finding that all I
want is Swamiji. All I feel is Swamiji. The only person I talk to in my prayers and meditations is
Swamiji. Its the Swamiji channel, round the clock. I am in the furnace of Swamiji here and I
can feel him working on me. Even in his death, theres something so earthy and present
about him. Hes the master I need when Im really struggling, because I can curse him and
show him all my failures and flaws and all he does is laugh. Laugh, and love me. His laughter
makes me angrier and the anger motivates me to act. And I never feel him closer to me than
when Im struggling through the Gurugita, with its unfathomable Sanskrit verses. Im arguing
with Swamiji the whole time in my head, making all kinds of blowhard proclamations, like,
You better be doing something for me because Im doing this for you! I better see some results
here! This better be purifying! Yesterday, I got so incensed when I looked down at my
chanting book and realized we were only on Verse Twenty-five and I was already burning in
discomfort, already sweating (and not like a person sweats, either, but rather like a cheese
sweats), that I actually expelled a loud: You gotta be kidding me! and a few women turned
and looked at me in alarm, expecting, no doubt, to see my head start spinning demonically on
my neck.
Every once in a while I recall that I used to live in Rome and spend my leisurely mornings
eating pastries and drinking cappuccino and reading the newspaper.
That sure was nice.
Though it seems very far away now.
Eat, Pray, Love

 54


 This morning, I overslept. Which is to saysloth that I am, I dozed until the ungodly hour of
4:15 AM. I woke up only minutes before the Gurugita was to begin, motivated myself reluctantly
to get out of bed, splashed some water on my face, dressed andfeeling so crusty and
cranky and resentfulwent to leave my room in the predawn pitch-black . . . only to find that
my roommate had left the room before me and had locked me in.
This was a really difficult thing for her to have done. Its not that big a room and its hard
not to notice that your roommate is still sleeping in the next bed. And shes a really responsible,
practical womana mother of five from Australia. This is not her style. But she did it. She
literally padlocked me in the room.
My first thought, was: If there were ever a good excuse not to go to the Gurugita, this
would be it. My second thought, though? Wellit wasnt even a thought. It was an action.
I jumped out the window.
To be specific, I crawled outside over the railing, gripping it with my sweaty palms and
dangling there from two stories up over the darkness for a moment, only then asking myself
the reasonable question, Why are you jumping out of this building? My reply came with a
fierce, impersonal determination: I have to get to the Gurugita. Then I let go and dropped
backward maybe twelve or fifteen feet through the dark air to the concrete sidewalk below,
hitting something on the way down that peeled a long strip of skin off my right shin, but I didnt
care. I picked myself up and ran barefoot, my pulse slamming in my ears, all the way to the
temple, found a seat, opened up my prayer book just as the chant was beginning
andbleeding down my leg the whole whileI started to sing the Gurugita.
It was only after a few verses that I caught my breath and was able to think my normal, instinctive
morning thought: I dont want to be here. After which I heard Swamiji burst out laughing
in my head, saying: Thats funnyyou sure act like somebody who wants to be here.
And I replied to him, OK, then. You win.
I sat there, singing and bleeding and thinking that it was maybe time for me to change my
relationship with this particular spiritual practice. The Gurugita is meant to be a hymn of pure
love, but something had been stopping me short from offering up that love in sincerity. So as I
chanted each verse I realized that I needed to find somethingor somebodyto whom I
could devote this hymn, in order to find a place of pure love within me. By Verse Twenty, I
had it: Nick.
Nick, my nephew, is an eight-year-old boy, skinny for his age, scarily smart, frighteningly
astute, sensitive and complex. Even minutes after his birth, amid all the squalling newborns in
the nursery, he alone was not crying, but looking around with adult, worldly and worried eyes,
looking as though hed done all this before so many times and wasnt sure how excited he felt
about having to do it again. This is a child for whom life is never simple, a child who hears and
sees and feels everything intensely, a child who can be overcome by emotion so fast sometimes
that it unnerves us all. I love this boy so deeply and protectively. I realizeddoing the
math on the time difference between India and Pennsylvaniathat it was nearing his bedtime
back home. So I sang the Gurugita to my nephew Nick, to help him sleep. Sometimes he has
trouble sleeping because he cannot still his mind. So each devotional word of this hymn, I
dedicated to Nick. I filled the song with everything I wished I could teach him about life. I tried
to reassure him with every line about how the world is hard and unfair sometimes, but that its
all OK because he is so loved. He is surrounded by souls who would do anything to help him.
And not only thathe has wisdom and patience of his own, buried deep inside his being,
which will only reveal themselves over time and will always carry him through any trial. He is a
gift from God to all of us. I told him this fact through this old Sanskrit scripture, and soon I noticed
that I was weeping cool tears. But before I could wipe the tears away the Gurugita was
over. The hour and a half was finished. It felt like ten minutes had passed. I realized what had
happenedthat Nicky had carried me through it. The little soul Id wanted to help had actually
been helping me.
I walked to the front of the temple and bowed flat on my face in gratitude to my God, to the
revolutionary power of love, to myself, to my Guru and to my nephewbriefly understanding
on a molecular level (not an intellectual level) that there was no difference whatsoever
between any of these words or any of these ideas or any of these people. Then I slid into the
meditation cave, where I skipped breakfast and sat for almost two hours, humming with stillness.
Needless to say, I never missed the Gurugita again, and it became the most holy of my
practices at the Ashram. Of course Richard from Texas went to great lengths to tease me
about having jumped out of the dormitory, being sure to say to me every night after dinner,
See you at The Geet tomorrow morning, Groceries. And, heytry using the stairs this time,
OK? And, of course, I called my sister the next week and she said thatfor reasons nobody
could understandNick suddenly wasnt having trouble falling asleep anymore. And naturally
I was reading in the library a few days later from a book about the Indian saint Sri Ra-
makrishna, and I stumbled upon a story about a seeker who once came to see the great master
and admitted to him that she feared she was not a good enough devotee, feared that she
did not love God enough. And the saint said, Is there nothing you love? The woman admitted
that she adored her young nephew more than anything on earth. The saint said, There,
then. He is your Krishna, your beloved. In your service to your nephew, you are serving God.
But all this is inconsequential. The really amazing thing happened the same day Id
jumped out of the building. That afternoon, I ran into Delia, my roommate. I told her that she
had padlocked me into our room. She was aghast. She said, I cant imagine why I wouldve
done that! Especially because youve been on my mind all morning. I had this really vivid
dream about you last night. I havent been able to stop thinking about it all day.
Tell me, I said.
I dreamt that you were on fire, Delia said, and that your bed was on fire, too. I jumped
up to try to help you, but by the time I got there, you were nothing but white ash.
Eat, Pray, Love

 55


 It was then I decided I needed to stay here at the Ashram. This was so totally not my original
plan. My original plan had been to stay here for just six weeks, have a bit of transcendental
experience, then continue traveling all over India . . . um . . . looking for God. I had maps and
guidebooks and hiking boots and everything! I had specific temples and mosques and holy
men I was all lined up to meet. I meanits India! Theres so much to see and experience
here. Ive got a lot of mileage to cover, temples to explore, elephants and camels to ride. And
Id be devastated to miss the Ganges, the great Rajasthani desert, the nutty Mumbai movie
houses, the Himalayas, the old tea plantations, the Calcutta rickshaws racing against each
other like the chariot scene from Ben-Hur. And I was even planning on meeting the Dalai
Lama in March, up in Daramsala. I was hoping he could teach me about God.
But to stay put, to immobilize myself in a small Ashram in a tiny little village in the middle
of nowhereno, this was not my plan.
On the other hand, the Zen masters always say that you cannot see your reflection in running
water, only in still water. So something was telling me it would be spiritually negligent to
run off now, when so much was happening right here in this small, cloistered place where
every minute of the day is organized to facilitate self-exploration and devotional practice. Did I
really need to get on a bunch of trains and pick up intestinal parasites and hang around backpackers
right now? Couldnt I do that later? Couldnt I meet the Dalai Lama some other time?
Wont the Dalai Lama always be there?(And, if he should die, heaven forbid, wont they just
find another one?) Dont I already have a passport that looks like a tattooed circus lady? Is
more travel really going to bring me any closer to revelatory contact with divinity?
I didnt know what to do. I spent a day wavering over the decision. As usual, Richard from
Texas had the last word.
Stay put, Groceries, he said. Forget about sightseeingyou got the rest of your life for
that. Youre on a spiritual journey, baby. Dont cop out and only go halfway to your potential.
You got a personal invitation from God hereyou really gonna turn that away?
But what about all those beautiful things to see in India? I asked. Isnt it kind of a pity to
travel halfway around the world just to stay in a little Ashram the whole time?
Groceries, baby, listen your friend Richard. You go set your lily-white ass down in that
meditation cave every day for the next three months and I promise you thisyoure gonna
start seeing some stuff thats so damn beautiful itll make you wanna throw rocks at the Taj
Mahal.
Eat, Pray, Love

 56


 Heres what I caught myself thinking about in meditation this morning.
I was wondering where I should live once this year of traveling has ended. I dont want to
move back to New York just out of reflex. Maybe a new town, instead. Austin is supposed to
be nice. And Chicago has all that beautiful architecture. Horrible winters, though. Or maybe Ill
live abroad. Ive heard good things about Sydney . . . If I lived somewhere cheaper than New
York, maybe I could afford an extra bedroom and then I could have a special meditation
room! Thatd be nice. I could paint it gold. Or maybe a rich blue. No, gold. No, blue . . .
Finally noticing this train of thought, I was aghast. I thought: Here you are in India, in an
Ashram in one of the holiest pilgrimage sites on earth. And instead of communing with the divine,
youre trying to plan where youll be meditating a year from now in a home that doesnt
yet exist in a city yet to be determined. How about this, you spastic foolhow about you try to
meditate right here, right now, right where you actually are?
I pulled my attention back to the silent repetition of the mantra.
A few moments later, I paused to take back that mean comment about calling myself a
spastic fool. I decided maybe that wasnt very loving.
 Still, I thought in the next moment, a gold meditation room would be nice.
I opened my eyes and sighed. Is this really the best I can do?
So, that evening, I tried something new. Id recently met a woman at the Ashram whod
been studying Vipassana meditation. Vipassana is an ultraorthodox, stripped-down and very
intensive Buddhist meditation technique. Basically, its just sitting. An introductory Vipassana
course lasts for ten days, during which time you sit for ten hours a day in stretches of silence
that last two to three hours at a time. Its the Extreme Sports version of transcendence. Your
Vipassana master wont even give you a mantra; this is considered a kind of cheating. Vipassana
meditation is the practice of pure regarding, witnessing your mind and offering your
complete consideration to your thought patterns, but allowing nothing to move you from your
seat.
Its physically grueling too. You are forbidden to shift your body at all once you have been
seated, no matter how severe your discomfort. You just sit there and tell yourself, Theres no
reason I need to move at all during the next two hours. If you are feeling discomfort then you
are supposed to meditate upon that discomfort, watching the effect that physical pain has on
you. In our real lives, we are constantly hopping around to adjust ourselves around discomfortphysical,
emotional and psychologicalin order to evade the reality of grief and nuisance.
Vipassana meditation teaches that grief and nuisance are inevitable in this life, but if
you can plant yourself in stillness long enough, you will, in time, experience the truth that
everything (both uncomfortable and lovely) does eventually pass.
The world is afflicted with death and decay, therefore the wise do not grieve, knowing the
terms of the world, says an old Buddhist teaching. In other words: Get used to it.
I dont think Vipassana is necessarily the path for me. Its far too austere for my notions of
devotional practice, which generally revolve around compassion and love and butterflies and
bliss and a friendly God (what my friend Darcey calls Slumber Party Theology). There isnt
even any talk about God in Vipassana, since the notion of God is considered by some
Buddhists to be the final object of dependency, the ultimate fuzzy security blanket, the last
thing to be abandoned on the path to pure detachment. Now, I have my own personal issues
with the very word detachment, having met spiritual seekers who already seem to live in a
state of complete emotional disconnect from other human beings and who, when they talk
about the sacred pursuit of detachment, make me want to shake them and holler, Buddy,
that is the last thing you need to practice!
Still, I can see where cultivating a measure of intelligent detachment in your life can be a
valuable instrument of peace. And after reading about Vipassana meditation in the library one
afternoon, I got to thinking about how much time I spend in my life crashing around like a
great gasping fish, either squirming away from some uncomfortable distress or flopping hungrily
toward ever more pleasure. And I wondered whether it might serve me (and those who
are burdened with the task of loving me) if I could learn to stay still and endure a bit more
without always getting dragged along on the potholed road of circumstance.
All these questions came back to me this evening, when I found a quiet bench in one of
the Ashram gardens and decided to sit in meditation for an hourVipassana-style. No movement,
no agitation, not even mantrajust pure regarding. Lets see what comes up. Unfortunately,
I had forgotten about what comes up at dusk in India: mosquitoes. As I soon as I sat
down on that bench in the lovely gloaming, I could hear the mosquitoes coming at me, brushing
against my face and landingin a group assaulton my head, ankles, arms. And then
their fierce little burns. I didnt like this. I thought, This is a bad time of day to practice Vipassana
meditation.
On the other handwhen is it a good time of day, or life, to sit in detached stillness?
When isnt there something buzzing about, trying to distract you and get a rise out of you? So
I made a decision (inspired again by my Gurus instruction that we are to become scientists of
our own inner experience). I presented myself with an experimentwhat if I sat through this
for once? Instead of slapping and griping, what if I sat through the discomfort, just for one
hour of my long life?
So I did it. In stillness, I watched myself get eaten by mosquitoes. To be honest, part of
me was wondering what this little macho experiment was meant to prove, but another part of
me well knewit was a beginners attempt at self-mastery. If I could sit through this nonlethal
physical discomfort, then what other discomforts might I someday be able to sit through?
What about emotional discomforts, which are even harder for me to endure? What about jealousy,
anger, fear, disappointment, loneliness, shame, boredom?
The itch was maddening at first but eventually it just melded into a general burning feeling
and I rode that heat to a mild euphoria. I allowed the pain to lose its specific associations and
become pure sensationneither good nor bad, just intenseand that intensity lifted me out
of myself and into meditation. I sat there for two hours. A bird might very well have landed on
my head; I wouldnt have noticed.
Let me be clear about one thing. I recognize that this experiment wasnt the most stoic act
of fortitude in the history of mankind, and Im not asking for a Congressional Medal of Honor
here. But there was something mildly thrilling for me about realizing that in my thirty-four
years on earth I have never not slapped at a mosquito when it was biting me. Ive been a puppet
to this and to millions of other small and large signals of pain or pleasure throughout my
life. Whenever something happens, I always react. But here I wasdisregarding the reflex. I
was doing something Id never done before. A small thing, granted, but how often do I get to
say that? And what will I be able to do tomorrow that I cannot yet do today?
When it was all over, I stood up, walked to my room and assessed the damage. I counted
about twenty mosquito bites. But within a half an hour, all the bites had diminished. It all goes
away. Eventually, everything goes away.
Eat, Pray, Love

 57


 The search for God is a reversal of the normal, mundane worldly order. In the search for
God, you revert from what attracts you and swim toward that which is difficult. You abandon
your comforting and familiar habits with the hope (the mere hope!) that something greater will
be offered you in return for what youve given up. Every religion in the world operates on the
same common understandings of what it means to be a good discipleget up early and pray
to your God, hone your virtues, be a good neighbor, respect yourself and others, master your
cravings. We all agree that it would be easier to sleep in, and many of us do, but for millennia
there have been others who choose instead to get up before the sun and wash their faces
and go to their prayers. And then fiercely try to hold on to their devotional convictions
throughout the lunacy of another day.
The devout of this world perform their rituals without guarantee that anything good will
ever come of it. Of course there are plenty of scriptures and plenty of priests who make plenty
of promises as to what your good works will yield (or threats as to the punishments awaiting
you if you lapse), but to even believe all this is an act of faith, because nobody amongst us is
shown the endgame. Devotion is diligence without assurance. Faith is a way of saying, Yes, I
pre-accept the terms of the universe and I embrace in advance what I am presently incapable
of understanding. Theres a reason we refer to leaps of faithbecause the decision to consent
to any notion of divinity is a mighty jump from the rational over to the unknowable, and I
dont care how diligently scholars of every religion will try to sit you down with their stacks of
books and prove to you through scripture that their faith is indeed rational; it isnt. If faith were
rational, it wouldnt beby definitionfaith. Faith is belief in what you cannot see or prove or
touch. Faith is walking face-first and full-speed into the dark. If we truly knew all the answers
in advance as to the meaning of life and the nature of God and the destiny of our souls, our
belief would not be a leap of faith and it would not be a courageous act of humanity; it would
just be . . . a prudent insurance policy.
Im not interested in the insurance industry. Im tired of being a skeptic, Im irritated by
spiritual prudence and I feel bored and parched by empirical debate. I dont want to hear it
anymore. I couldnt care less about evidence and proof and assurances. I just want God. I
want God inside me. I want God to play in my bloodstream the way sunlight amuses itself on
water.
Eat, Pray, Love

 58


 My prayers are becoming more deliberate and specific. It has occurred to me that its not
much use to send prayers out to the universe that are lazy. Every morning before meditation,
I kneel in the temple and talk for a few minutes to God. I found during the beginning of my
stay here at the Ashram that I was often dull-witted during those divine conversations. Tired,
confused and bored, my prayers sounded the same. I remember kneeling down one morning,
touching my forehead to the floor and muttering to my creator, Oh, I dunno what I need . . .
but you must have some ideas . . . so just do something about it, would you?
Similar to the way I have oftentimes spoken to my hairdresser.
And, Im sorry, but thats a little lame. You can imagine God regarding that prayer with an
arched eyebrow, and sending back this message: Call me again when you decide to get serious
about this.
Of course God already knows what I need. The question isdo I know? Casting yourself
at Gods feet in helpless desperation is all well and goodheaven knows, Ive done it myself
plenty of timesbut ultimately youre likely to get more out of the experience if you can take
some action on your end. Theres a wonderful old Italian joke about a poor man who goes to
church every day and prays before the statue of a great saint, begging, Dear saintplease,
please, please . . . give me the grace to win the lottery. This lament goes on for months. Finally
the exasperated statue comes to life, looks down at the begging man and says in weary
disgust, My sonplease, please, please . . . buy a ticket.
Prayer is a relationship; half the job is mine. If I want transformation, but cant even be
bothered to articulate what, exactly, Im aiming for, how will it ever occur? Half the benefit of
prayer is in the asking itself, in the offering of a clearly posed and well-considered intention. If
you dont have this, all your pleas and desires are boneless, floppy, inert; they swirl at your
feet in a cold fog and never lift. So now I take the time every morning to search myself for
specificity about what I am truly asking for. I kneel there in the temple with my face on that
cold marble for as long as it takes me to formulate an authentic prayer. If I dont feel sincere,
then I will stay there on the floor until I do. What worked yesterday doesnt always work today.
Prayers can become stale and drone into the boring and familiar if you let your attention stag-
nate. In making an effort to stay alert, I am assuming custodial responsibility for the maintenance
of my own soul.
Destiny, I feel, is also a relationshipa play between divine grace and willful self-effort.
Half of it you have no control over; half of it is absolutely in your hands, and your actions will
show measurable consequence. Man is neither entirely a puppet of the gods, nor is he entirely
the captain of his own destiny; hes a little of both. We gallop through our lives like circus
performers balancing on two speeding side-by-side horsesone foot is on the horse called
fate, the other on the horse called free will. And the question you have to ask every day
iswhich horse is which? Which horse do I need to stop worrying about because its not under
my control, and which do I need to steer with concentrated effort?
There is so much about my fate that I cannot control, but other things do fall under my jurisdiction.
There are certain lottery tickets I can buy, thereby increasing my odds of finding
contentment. I can decide how I spend my time, whom I interact with, whom I share my body
and life and money and energy with. I can select what I eat and read and study. I can choose
how Im going to regard unfortunate circumstances in my lifewhether I will see them as
curses or opportunities (and on the occasions when I cant rise to the most optimistic viewpoint,
because Im feeling too damn sorry for myself, I can choose to keep trying to change
my outlook). I can choose my words and the tone of voice in which I speak to others. And
most of all, I can choose my thoughts.
This last concept is a radically new idea for me. Richard from Texas brought it to my attention
recently, when I was complaining about my inability to stop brooding. He said, Groceries,
you need to learn how to select your thoughts just the same way you select what clothes
youre gonna wear every day. This is a power you can cultivate. If you want to control things
in your life so bad, work on the mind. Thats the only thing you should be trying to control.
Drop everything else but that. Because if you cant learn to master your thinking, youre in
deep trouble forever.
On first glance, this seems a nearly impossible task. Control your thoughts? Instead of the
other way around? But imagine if you could? This is not about repression or denial. Repression
and denial set up elaborate games to pretend that negative thoughts and feelings are not
occurring. What Richard is talking about is instead admitting to the existence of negative
thoughts, understanding where they came from and why they arrived, and thenwith great
forgiveness and fortitudedismissing them. This is a practice that fits hand-in-glove with any
psychological work you do during therapy. You can use the shrinks office to understand why
you have these destructive thoughts in the first place; you can use spiritual exercises to help
overcome them. Its a sacrifice to let them go, of course. Its a loss of old habits, comforting
old grudges and familiar vignettes. Of course this all takes practice and effort. Its not a teach-
ing that you can hear once and then expect to master immediately. Its constant vigilance and
I want to do it. I need to do it, for my strength. Devo farmi le ossa is how they say it in Italian.
I need to make my bones.
So Ive started being vigilant about watching my thoughts all day, and monitoring them. I
repeat this vow about 700 times a day: I will not harbor unhealthy thoughts anymore. Every
time a diminishing thought arises, I repeat the vow. I will not harbor unhealthy thoughts anymore.
The first time I heard myself say this, my inner ear perked up at the word harbor,
which is a noun as well as a verb. A harbor, of course, is a place of refuge, a port of entry. I
pictured the harbor of my minda little beat-up, perhaps, a little storm-worn, but well situated
and with a nice depth. The harbor of my mind is an open bay, the only access to the island of
my Self (which is a young and volcanic island, yes, but fertile and promising). This island has
been through some wars, it is true, but it is now committed to peace, under a new leader (me)
who has instituted new policies to protect the place. And nowlet the word go out across the
seven seasthere are much, much stricter laws on the books about who may enter this harbor.

You may not come here anymore with your hard and abusive thoughts, with your plague
ships of thoughts, with your slave ships of thoughts, with your warships of thoughtsall these
will be turned away. Likewise, any thoughts that are filled with angry or starving exiles, with
malcontents and pamphleteers, mutineers and violent assassins, desperate prostitutes, pimps
and seditious stowawaysyou may not come here anymore, either. Cannibalistic thoughts,
for obvious reasons, will no longer be received. Even missionaries will be screened carefully,
for sincerity. This is a peaceful harbor, the entryway to a fine and proud island that is only now
beginning to cultivate tranquillity. If you can abide by these new laws, my dear thoughts, then
you are welcome in my mindotherwise, I shall turn you all back toward the sea from whence
you came.
That is my mission, and it will never end.
Eat, Pray, Love

 59


 Ive made good friends with this seventeen-year-old Indian girl named Tulsi. She works
with me scrubbing the temple floors every day. Every evening we take a walk through the gardens
of the Ashram together and talk about God and hip-hop music, two subjects for which
Tulsi feels equivalent devotion. Tulsi is just about the cutest little bookworm of an Indian girl
you ever saw, even cuter since one lens of her specs (as she calls her eye-glasses) broke
last week in a cartoonish spiderweb design, which hasnt stopped her from wearing them.
Tulsi is so many interesting and foreign things to me at oncea teenager, a tomboy, an Indian
girl, a rebel in her family, a soul who is so crazy about God that its almost like shes got a
schoolgirl crush on Him. She also speaks a delightful, lilting Englishthe kind of English you
can find only in Indiawhich includes such colonial words as splendid! and nonsense! and
sometimes produces eloquent sentences like: It is beneficial to walk on the grass in the
morning when the dew has already been accumulated, for it lowers naturally and pleasantly
the bodys temperature. When I told her once that I was going to Mumbai for the day, Tulsi
said, Please stand carefully, as you will find there are many speeding buses everywhere.
Shes exactly half my age, and practically half my size.
Tulsi and I have been talking a lot about marriage lately during our walks. Soon she will
turn eighteen, and this is the age when she will be regarded as a legitimate marriage prospect.
It will happen like thisafter her eighteenth birthday, she will be required to attend family
weddings dressed in a sari, signaling her womanhood. Some nice Amma (Aunty) will
come and sit beside her, start asking questions and getting to know her: How old are you?
Whats your family background? What does your father do? What universities are you applying
to? What are your interests? When is your birthday? Next thing you know, Tulsis dad will
get a big envelope in the mail with a photo of this womans grandson who is studying computer
sciences in Delhi, along with the boys astrology charts and his university grades and
the inevitable question, Would your daughter care to marry him?
Tulsi says, It sucks.
But it means so much to the family, to see their children wedded off successfully. Tulsi has
an aunt who just shaved her head as a gesture of thanks to God because her oldest daugh-
terat the Jurassic age of twenty-eightfinally got married. And this was a difficult girl to
marry off, too; she had a lot of strikes against her. I asked Tulsi what makes an Indian girl difficult
to marry off, and she said there are any number of reasons.
If she has a bad horoscope. If shes too old. If her skin is too dark. If shes too educated
and you cant find a man with a higher position than hers, and this is a widespread problem
these days because a woman cannot be more educated than her husband. Or if shes had an
affair with someone and the whole community knows about it, oh, it would be quite difficult to
find a husband after that . . .
I quickly ran through the list, trying to see how marriageable I would appear in Indian society.
I dont know whether my horoscope is good or bad, but Im definitely too old and Im way
too educated, and my morals have been publicly demonstrated to be quite tarnished . . . Im
not a very appealing prospect. At least my skin is fair. I have only this in my favor.
Tulsi had to go to another cousins wedding last week, and she was saying (in very unIndian
fashion) how much she hates weddings. All that dancing and gossip. All that dressing
up. She would rather be at the Ashram scrubbing floors and meditating. Nobody else in her
family can understand this; her devotion to God is way beyond anything they consider normal.
Tulsi said, In my family, they have already given up on me as too different. I have established
a reputation for being someone who, if you tell her to do one thing, will almost certainly do the
other. I also have a temper. And Im not dedicated to my studies, except that now I will be, because
now Im going to college and I can decide for myself what Im interested in. I want to
study psychology, just as our Guru did when she attended college. Im considered a difficult
girl. I have a reputation for needing to be told a good reason to do something before I will do
it. My mother understands this about me and always tries to give good reasons, but my father
doesnt. He gives reasons, but I dont think theyre good enough. Sometimes I wonder what
Im doing in my family because I dont resemble them at all.
Tulsis cousin who got married last week is only twenty-one, and her older sister is next on
the marriage list at age twenty, which means there will be huge pressure after that for Tulsi
herself to find a husband. I asked her if she wanted to ever get married and she said:
Noooooooooooooooooooooo . . .
. . . and the word drew out longer than the sunset we were watching over the gardens.
I want to roam! she said. Like you.
You know, Tulsi, I couldnt always roam like this. I was married once.
She frowned at me through her cracked specs, studying me with a quizzical look, almost
as if Id just told her Id once been a brunette and she was trying to imagine it. In the end, she
pronounced: You, married? I cannot picture this.
But its trueI was.
Are you the one who ended the marriage?
Yes.
She said, I think its most commendable that you ended your marriage. You seem splendidly
happy now. But as for mehow did I get here? Why was I born an Indian girl? Its outrageous!
Why did I come into this family? Why must I attend so many weddings?
Then Tulsi ran around in a frustrated circle, shouting (quite loudly for Ashram standards):
I want to live in Hawaii!!!
Eat, Pray, Love

 60


 Richard from Texas was married once, too. He had two sons, both of whom are grown men
now, both close to their dad. Sometimes Richard mentions his ex-wife in some anecdote or
other, and he always seems to speak of her with fondness. I get a bit envious whenever I
hear this, imagining how lucky Richard is to still be friends with his former spouse, even after
separating. This is an odd side effect of my terrible divorce; whenever I hear of couples splitting
amicably, I get jealous. Its worse than thatIve actually come to think that its really romantic
when a marriage ends civilly. Like, Aw . . . how sweet . . . they mustve really loved
each other . . .
So I asked Richard one day about it. I said, It seems like you have fond feelings toward
your ex-wife. Are you two still close?
Nah, he said casually. She thinks I changed my name to Motherfucker.
Richards lack of concern about this impressed me. My own ex-spouse happens to think I
changed my name too, and it breaks my heart. One of the hardest things about this divorce
was the fact that my ex-husband never forgave me for leaving, that it didnt matter how many
bushels of apologies or explanations I laid at his feet, how much blame I assumed, or how
many assets or acts of contrition I was willing to offer him in exchange for departinghe certainly
was never going to congratulate me and say, Hey, I was so impressed with your generosity
and honesty and I just want to tell you its been a great pleasure being divorced by you.
No. I was unredeemable. And this unredeemed dark hole was still inside me. Even in moments
of happiness and excitement (especially in moments of happiness and excitement) I
could never forget it for long. I am still hated by him. And that felt like it would never change,
never release.
I was talking about all this one day with my friends at the Ashramthe newest member of
whom is a plumber from New Zealand, a guy Id met because hed heard I was a writer and
he sought me out to tell me that he was one, too. Hes a poet who had recently published a
terrific memoir in New Zealand called A Plumbers Progress about his own spiritual journey.
The plumber/poet from New Zealand, Richard from Texas, the Irish dairy farmer, Tulsi the Indian
teenage tomboy and Vivian, an older woman with wispy white hair and incandescently
humorous eyes (who used to be a nun in South Africa)this was my circle of close friends
here, a most vibrant crowd of characters whom I never would have expected to meet at an
Ashram in India.
So, during lunch one day, we were all having this conversation together about marriage,
and the plumber/poet from New Zealand said, I see marriage as an operation that sews two
people together, and divorce is a kind of amputation that can take a long time to heal. The
longer you were married, or the rougher the amputation, the harder it is to recover.
Which would explain the postdivorce, postamputation sensations Ive had for a few years
now, of still swinging that phantom limb around, constantly knocking stuff off the shelves.
Richard from Texas was wondering if I was planning on allowing my ex-husband to dictate
for the rest of my life how I felt about myself, and I said I wasnt too sure about that, actuallyso
far, my ex still seemed to have a pretty strong vote, and to be honest I was still
halfway waiting for the man to forgive me, to release me and allow me to go forth in peace.
The dairy farmer from Ireland observed, Waiting for that day to arrive is not exactly a rational
use of your time.
What can I say, guys? I do a lot with guilt. Kind of like the way other women do a lot with
beige.
The former Catholic nun (who oughtta know about guilt, after all) wouldnt hear of it.
Guilts just your egos way of tricking you into thinking that youre making moral progress.
Dont fall for it, my dear.
What I hate about the way my marriage ended, I said, is that its so unresolved. Its just
an open wound that never goes away.
If you insist, said Richard. If thats how youve decided to think about it, dont let me
spoil your party.
One of these days this has to end, I said. I just wish I knew how.
When lunch ended, the plumber/poet from New Zealand slipped me a note. It said to meet
him after dinner; he wanted to show me something. So after dinner that night I met him over
by the meditation caves, and he told me to follow him, that he had a gift for me. He walked me
across the Ashram, then led me to a building Id never been inside before, unlocked a door
and took me up a back set of stairs. He knew of this place, I guessed, because he fixes all the
air-conditioning units, and some of them are located up there. At the top of the stairs there
was a door which he had to unlock with a combination; he did this swiftly, from memory. Then
we were up on a gorgeous rooftop, tiled in ceramic chips that glittered in the evening twilight
like the bottom of a reflecting pool. He took me across that roof to a little tower, a minaret,
really, and showed me another narrow set of stairs, leading to the tippity-top of the tower. He
pointed to the tower and said, Im going to leave you now. Youre going to go up there. Stay
up there until its finished.
Until whats finished? I asked.
The plumber just smiled, handed me a flashlight, for getting down safely when its over,
and also handed me a folded piece of paper. Then he left.
I climbed to the top of the tower. I was now standing at the tallest place in the Ashram,
with a view overlooking the entirety of this river valley in India. Mountains and farmland
stretched out as far as I could see. I had a feeling this was not a place students were normally
allowed to hang out, but it was so lovely up there. Maybe this is where my Guru watches the
sun go down, when shes in residence here. And the sun was going down right now. The
breeze was warm. I unfolded the piece of paper the plumber/poet had given me.
He had typed:
 INSTRUCTIONS FOR FREEDOM



 1. Lifes metaphors are Gods instructions.

 2. You have just climbed up and above the roof. There is nothing between you and the Infinite.
Now, let go.

 3. The day is ending. Its time for something that was beautiful to turn into something else
that is beautiful. Now, let go.

 4. Your wish for resolution was a prayer. Your being here is Gods response. Let go, and
watch the stars come outon the outside and on the inside.

 5. With all your heart, ask for grace, and let go.

 6. With all your heart, forgive him, FORGIVE YOURSELF, and let him go.

 7. Let your intention be freedom from useless suffering. Then, let go.

 8. Watch the heat of day pass into the cool night. Let go.

 9. When the karma of a relationship is done, only love remains. Its safe. Let go.

 10. When the past has passed from you at last, let go. Then climb down and begin the rest
of your life. With great joy.

For the first few minutes, I couldnt stop laughing. I could see over the whole valley, over
the umbrella of the mango trees, and the wind was blowing my hair around like a flag. I
watched the sun go down, and then I lay down on my back and watched the stars come out. I
sang a small little prayer in Sanskrit, and repeated it every time I saw a new star emerge in
the darkening sky, almost like I was calling forth the stars, but then they started popping out
too fast and I couldnt keep up with them. Soon the whole sky was a glitzy show of stars. The
only thing between me and God was . . . nothing.
Then I shut my eyes and I said, Dear Lord, please show me everything I need to understand
about forgiveness and surrender.
What I had wanted for so long was to have an actual conversation with my ex-husband,
but this was obviously never going to happen. What I had been craving was a resolution, a
peace summit, from which we could emerge with a united understanding of what had occurred
in our marriage, and a mutual forgiveness for the ugliness of our divorce. But months
of counseling and mediation had only made us more divided and locked our positions solid,
turning us into two people who were absolutely incapable of giving each other any release.
Yet its what we both needed, I was sure of it. And I was sure of this, toothat the rules of
transcendence insist that you will not advance even one inch closer to divinity as long as you
cling to even one last seductive thread of blame. As smoking is to the lungs, so is resentment
to the soul; even one puff of it is bad for you. I mean, what kind of prayer is this to imbibeGive
us this day our daily grudge? You might just as well hang it up and kiss God
good-bye if you really need to keep blaming somebody else for your own lifes limitations. So
what I asked of God that night on the Ashram roof wasgiven the reality that I would prob-
ably never speak to my ex-husband againmight there be some level upon which we could
communicate? Some level on which we could forgive?
I lay up there, high above the world, and I was all alone. I dropped into meditation and
waited to be told what to do. I dont know how many minutes or hours passed before I knew
what to do. I realized Id been thinking about all this too literally. Id been wanting to talk to my
ex-husband? So talk to him. Talk to him right now. Id been waiting to be offered forgiveness?
Offer it up personally, then. Right now. I thought of how many people go to their graves unforgiven
and unforgiving. I thought of how many people have had siblings or friends or children
or lovers disappear from their lives before precious words of clemency or absolution could be
passed along. How do the survivors of terminated relationships ever endure the pain of unfinished
business? From that place of meditation, I found the answeryou can finish the business
yourself, from within yourself. Its not only possible, its essential.
And then, to my surprise, still in meditation, I did an odd thing. I invited my ex-husband to
please join me up here on this rooftop in India. I asked him if he would be kind enough to
meet me up here for this farewell event. Then I waited until I felt him arrive. And he did arrive.
His presence was suddenly absolute and tangible. I could practically smell him.
I said, Hi, sweetie.
I almost started to cry right then, but quickly realized I didnt need to. Tears are part of this
bodily life, and the place where these two souls were meeting that night in India had nothing
to do with the body. The two people who needed to talk to each other up there on the roof
were not even people anymore. They wouldnt even be talking. They werent even exspouses,
not an obstinate midwesterner and a high-strung Yankee, not a guy in his forties
and a woman in her thirties, not two limited people who had argued for years about sex and
money and furniturenone of this was relevant. For the purposes of this meeting, at the level
of this reunion, they were just two cool blue souls who already understood everything. Unbound
by their bodies, unbound by the complex history of their past relationship, they came
together above this roof (above me, even) in infinite wisdom. Still in meditation, I watched
these two cool blue souls circle each other, merge, divide again and regard each others perfection
and similarity. They knew everything. They knew everything long ago and they will always
know everything. They didnt need to forgive each other; they were born forgiving each
other.
The lesson they were teaching me in their beautiful turning was, Stay out of this, Liz. Your
part of this relationship is over. Let us work things out from now on. You go on with your life.
Much later I opened my eyes, and I knew it was over. Not just my marriage and not just
my divorce, but all the unfinished bleak hollow sadness of it . . . it was over. I could feel that I
was free. Let me be clearits not that I would never again think about my ex-husband, or
never again have any emotions attached to the memory of him. Its just that this ritual on the
rooftop had finally given me a place where I could house those thoughts and feelings whenever
they would arise in the futureand they will always arise. But when they do show up again,
I can just send them back here, back to this rooftop of memory, back to the care of those two
cool blue souls who already and always understand everything.
This is what rituals are for. We do spiritual ceremonies as human beings in order to create
a safe resting place for our most complicated feelings of joy or trauma, so that we dont have
to haul those feelings around with us forever, weighing us down. We all need such places of
ritual safekeeping. And I do believe that if your culture or tradition doesnt have the specific
ritual youre craving, then you are absolutely permitted to make up a ceremony of your own
devising, fixing your own broken-down emotional systems with all the do-it-yourself resourcefulness
of a generous plumber/poet. If you bring the right earnestness to your homemade ceremony,
God will provide the grace. And that is why we need God.
So I stood up and did a handstand on my Gurus roof, to celebrate the notion of liberation.
I felt the dusty tiles under my hands. I felt my own strength and balance. I felt the easy night
breeze on the palms of my bare feet. This kind of thinga spontaneous handstandisnt
something a disembodied cool blue soul can do, but a human being can do it. We have
hands; we can stand on them if we want to. Thats our privilege. Thats the joy of a mortal
body. And thats why God needs us. Because God loves to feel things through our hands.
Eat, Pray, Love

 61


 Richard from Texas left today. Flew back to Austin. I took the drive with him to the airport,
and we were both sad. We stood for a long time on the sidewalk before he went inside.
What am I gonna do when I dont have Liz Gilbert to kick around anymore? He sighed.
Then he said, Youve had a good experience at the Ashram, havent you? You look all different
from a few months back, like maybe you chucked out some of that sorrow you been hauling
around.
Im feeling really happy these days, Richard.
Well, just rememberall your misery will be waiting for you at the door upon your exit,
should you care to pick it up again when you leave.
I wont pick it up again.
Good girl.
Youve helped me a lot, I told him. I think of you as an angel with hairy hands and
cruddy toenails.
Yeah, my toenails never really did recover from Vietnam, poor things.
It couldve been worse.
It was worse for a lot of guys. At least I got to keep my legs. Nope, I got a pretty cushy incarnation
in this lifetime, kiddo. So did younever forget that. Next lifetime you might come
back as one of those poor Indian women busting up rocks by the side of the road, find out life
aint so much fun. So appreciate what you got now, OK? Keep cultivating gratitude. Youll live
longer. And, Groceries? Do me a favor? Move ahead with your life, will ya?
I am.
What I mean isfind somebody new to love someday. Take the time you need to heal,
but dont forget to eventually share your heart with someone. Dont make your life a monument
to David or to your ex-husband.
I wont, I said. And I knew suddenly that it was trueI wouldnt. I could feel all this old
pain of lost love and past mistakes attenuating before my eyes, diminishing at last through the
famous healing powers of time, patience and the grace of God.
And then Richard spoke again, snapping my thoughts back quickly to the worlds more basic
realities: After all, baby, remember what they saysometimes the best way to get over
someone is to get under someone else.
I laughed. OK, Richard, thatll do. Now you can go back to Texas.
Might as well, he said, casting a gaze around this desolate Indian airport parking lot.
Cuz I aint gettin any prettier just standing around here.
Eat, Pray, Love

 62


 On my ride back to the Ashram, after seeing Richard off at the airport, I decide that Ive
been talking too much. To be honest, Ive been talking too much my whole life, but Ive really
been talking too much during my stay at the Ashram. I have another two months here, and I
dont want to waste the greatest spiritual opportunity of my life by being all social and chatty
the whole time. Its been amazing for me to discover that even here, even in a sacred environment
of spiritual retreat on the other side of the world, I have managed to create a cocktail-party-like
vibe around me. Its not just Richard Ive been talking to constantlythough we
did do the most gabbingIm always yakking with somebody. Ive even found myselfin an
Ashram, mind you!creating appointments to see acquaintances, having to say to somebody,
Im sorry, I cant hang out with you at lunch today because I promised Sakshi I would
eat with her . . . maybe we could make a date for next Tuesday.
This has been the story of my life. Its how I am. But Ive been thinking lately that this is
maybe a spiritual liability. Silence and solitude are universally recognized spiritual practices,
and there are good reasons for this. Learning how to discipline your speech is a way of preventing
your energies from spilling out of you through the rupture of your mouth, exhausting
you and filling the world with words, words, words instead of serenity, peace and bliss. Swamiji,
my Gurus master, was a stickler about silence in the Ashram, heavily enforcing it as a devotional
practice. He called silence the only true religion. Its ridiculous how much Ive been
talking at this Ashram, the one place in the world where silence shouldand canreign.
So Im not going to be the Ashram social bunny anymore, Ive decided. No more scurrying,
gossiping, joking. No more spotlight-hogging or conversation-dominating. No more verbal
tap-dancing for pennies of affirmation. Its time to change. Now that Richard is gone, Im going
to make the remainder of my stay a completely quiet experience. This will be difficult, but not
impossible, because silence is universally respected at the Ashram. The whole community
will support it, recognizing your decision as a disciplined act of devotion. In the bookstore they
even sell little badges you can wear which read, I am in Silence.
Im going to buy four of those little badges.
On the drive back to the Ashram, I really let myself dip into a fantasy about just how silent
I am going to become now. I will be so silent that it will make me famous. I imagine myself becoming
known as That Quiet Girl. Ill just keep to the Ashram schedule, take my meals in
solitude, meditate for endless hours every day and scrub the temple floors without making a
peep. My only interaction with others will be to smile beatifically at them from within my selfcontained
world of stillness and piety. People will talk about me. Theyll ask, Who is That
Quiet Girl in the Back of the Temple, always scrubbing the floors, down on her knees? She
never speaks. Shes so elusive. Shes so mystical. I cant even imagine what her voice
sounds like. You never even hear her coming up behind you on the garden path when shes
out walking . . . she moves as silently as the breeze. She must be in a constant state of meditative
communion with God. Shes the quietest girl Ive ever seen.
Eat, Pray, Love

 63


 The next morning I was down on my knees in the temple, scrubbing the marble floor again,
emanating (I imagined) a holy radiance of silence, when an Indian teenage boy came looking
for me with a messagethat I needed to report to the Seva Office immediately. Seva is the
Sanskrit term for the spiritual practice of selfless service (for instance, the scrubbing of a
temple floor). The Seva Office administers all the work assignments for the Ashram. So I
wandered over there, very curious as to why Id been summoned, and the nice lady at the
desk asked me, Are you Elizabeth Gilbert?
I smiled at her with the warmest piety and nodded. Silently.
Then she told me that my work detail had been changed. Due to a special request from
management, I was no longer to be part of the floor-scrubbing team. They had a new position
in mind for me at the Ashram.
And the title of my new job wasif you will kindly dig thisKey Hostess.
Eat, Pray, Love

 64


 This was so obviously another one of Swamijis jokes.
 You wanted to be The Quiet Girl in the Back of the Temple? Well, guess what . . .

But this is what always happens at the Ashram. You make some big grandiose decision
about what you need to do, or who you need to be, and then circumstances arise that immediately
reveal to you how little you understood about yourself. I dont know how many times
Swamiji said it during his lifetime, and I dont know how many more times my Guru has repeated
it since his death, but it seems I have not quite yet absorbed the truth of their most insistent
statement:
God dwells within you, as you.
 AS you.

If there is one holy truth of this Yoga, that line encapsulates it. God dwells within you as
you yourself, exactly the way you are. God isnt interested in watching you enact some performance
of personality in order to comply with some crackpot notion you have about how a
spiritual person looks or behaves. We all seem to get this idea that, in order to be sacred, we
have to make some massive, dramatic change of character, that we have to renounce our individuality.
This is a classic example of what they call in the East wrong-thinking. Swamiji
used to say that every day renunciants find something new to renounce, but it is usually depression,
not peace, that they attain. Constantly he was teaching that austerity and renunciationjust
for their own sakeare not what you need. To know God, you need only to renounce
one thingyour sense of division from God. Otherwise, just stay as you were made,
within your natural character.
So what is my natural character? I love studying in this Ashram, but my dream of finding
divinity by gliding silently through the place with a gentle, ethereal smilewho is that person?
Thats probably someone I saw on a TV show. The reality is, its a little sad for me to admit
that I will never be that character. Ive always been so fascinated by these wraith-like, delicate
souls. Always wanted to be the quiet girl. Probably precisely because Im not. Its the same
reason I think that thick, dark hair is so beautifulprecisely because I dont have it, because I
cant have it. But at some point you have to make peace with what you were given and if God
wanted me to be a shy girl with thick, dark hair, He would have made me that way, but He
didnt. Useful, then, might be to accept how I was made and embody myself fully therein.
Or, as Sextus, the ancient Pythagorian philospher, said, The wise man is always similar
to himself.
This doesnt mean I cannot be devout. It doesnt mean I cant be thoroughly tumbled and
humbled with Gods love. This does not mean I cannot serve humanity. It doesnt mean I cant
improve myself as a human being, honing my virtues and working daily to minimize my vices.
For instance, Im never going to be a wallflower, but that doesnt mean I cant take a serious
look at my talking habits and alter some aspects for the betterworking within my personality.
Yes, I like talking, but perhaps I dont have to curse so much, and perhaps I dont always
have to go for the cheap laugh, and maybe I dont need to talk about myself quite so constantly.
Or heres a radical conceptmaybe I can stop interrupting others when they are
speaking. Because no matter how creatively I try to look at my habit of interrupting, I cant find
another way to see it than this: I believe that what I am saying is more important than what
you are saying. And I cant find another way to see that than: I believe that I am more important
than you. And that must end.
All these changes would be useful to make. But even so, even with reasonable modifications
to my speaking habits, I probably wont ever be known as That Quiet Girl. No matter
how pretty a picture that is and no matter how hard I try. Because lets be really honest about
who were dealing with here. When the woman at the Ashram Seva Center gave me my new
job assignment of Key Hostess, she said, We have a special nickname for this position, you
know. We call it Little Suzy Creamcheese, because whoever does the job needs to be social
and bubbly and smiling all the time.
What could I say?
I just stuck out a hand to shake, bade a silent farewell to all my wishful old delusions and
announced, MadamIm your girl.
Eat, Pray, Love

 65


 What I will be hosting, to be exact, is a series of retreats to be held at the Ashram this
spring. During each retreat, about a hundred devotees will come here from all over the world
for a period of a week to ten days, to deepen their meditation practices. My role is to take care
of these people during their stay here. For most of the retreat, the participants will be in silence.
For some of them, it will be the first time theyve experienced silence as a devotional
practice, and it can be intense. However, I will be the one person in the Ashram they are allowed
to talk to if something is going wrong.
Thats rightmy job officially requires me to be the speech-magnet.
I will listen to the problems of the retreat participants and then try to find solutions for
them. Maybe theyll need to change roommates because of a snoring situation, or maybe
theyll need to speak to the doctor because of India-related digestive troubleIll try to solve
it. Ill need to know everybodys name, and where they are from. Ill be walking around with a
clipboard, taking notes and following up. Im Julie McCoy, your Yogic cruise director.
And, yes, the position does come with a beeper.
As the retreats begin, it is so quickly evident how much I am made for this job. Im sitting
there at the Welcome Table with my Hello, My Name Is badge, and these people are arriving
from thirty different countries, and some of them are old-timers but many of them have never
been to India. Its over 100 degrees already at 10:00 AM, and most of these people have
been flying all night in coach. Some of them walk into this Ashram looking like they just woke
up in the trunk of a carlike they have no idea at all what theyre doing here. Whatever desire
for transcendence drove them to apply for this spiritual retreat in the first place, theyve long
ago forgotten it, probably somewhere around the time their luggage got lost in Kuala Lumpur.
Theyre thirsty, but dont know yet if they can drink the water. Theyre hungry, but dont know
what time lunch is, or where the cafeteria can be found. Theyre dressed all wrong, wearing
synthetics and heavy boots in the tropical heat. They dont know if theres anyone here who
speaks Russian.
I can speak a teensy bit of Russian . . .
I can help them. I am so equipped to help. All the antennas Ive ever sprouted throughout
my lifetime that have taught me how to read what people are feeling, all the intuition I developed
growing up as the supersensitive younger child, all the listening skills I learned as a
sympathetic bartender and an inquisitive journalist, all the proficiency of care I mastered after
years of being somebodys wife or girlfriendit was all accumulated so that I could help ease
these good people into the difficult task theyve taken on. I see them coming in from Mexico,
from the Philippines, from Africa, from Denmark, from Detroit and it feels like that scene in
Close Encounters of the Third Kind where Richard Dreyfuss and all those other seekers have
been pulled to the middle of Wyoming for reasons they dont understand at all, drawn by the
arrival of the spaceship. I am so consumed by wonder at their bravery. These people have left
their families and lives behind for a few weeks to go into silent retreat amidst a crowd of perfect
strangers in India. Not everybody does this in their lifetime.
I love all these people, automatically and unconditionally. I even love the pain-in-the-ass
ones. I can see through their neuroses and recognize that theyre just horribly afraid of what
theyre going to face when they go into silence and meditation for seven days. I love the Indian
man who comes to me in outrage, reporting that theres a four-inch statue of the Indian
god Ganesh in his room which has one foot missing. Hes furious, thinks this is a terrible
omen and wants that statue removedideally by a Brahman priest, during a traditionally appropriate
cleansing ceremony. I comfort him and listen to his anger, then send my teenage
tomboy friend Tulsi over to the guys room to get rid of the statue while hes at lunch. The next
day I pass the man a note, telling him that I hope hes feeling better now that the broken
statue is gone, and reminding him that Im here if he needs anything else whatsoever; he rewards
me with a giant, relieved smile. Hes just afraid. The French woman who has a near
panic attack about her wheat allergiesshes afraid, too. The Argentinean man who wants a
special meeting with the entire staff of the Hatha Yoga department in order to be counseled
on how to sit properly during meditation so his ankle doesnt hurt; hes just afraid. Theyre all
afraid. Theyre going into silence, deep into their own minds and souls. Even for an experienced
meditator, nothing is more unknown than this territory. Anything can happen in there.
Theyll be guided during this retreat by a wonderful woman, a monk in her fifties, whose every
gesture and word is the embodiment of compassion, but theyre still afraid becauseas loving
as this monk may beshe cannot go with them where they are going. Nobody can.
As the retreat was beginning, I happened to get a letter in the mail from a friend of mine in
America who is a wildlife filmmaker for National Geographic. He told me hed just been to a
fancy dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York, honoring members of the Explorers Club.
He said it was amazing to be in the presence of such incredibly courageous people, all of
whom have risked their lives so many times to discover the worlds most remote and danger-
ous mountain ranges, canyons, rivers, ocean depths, ice fields and volcanoes. He said that
so many of them were missing bits of themselvestoes and noses and fingers lost over the
years to sharks, frostbite and other dangers.
He wrote, You have never seen so many brave people gathered in one place at the same
time.
I thought to myself, You aint seen nothin, Mike.
Eat, Pray, Love

 66


 The topic of the retreat, and its goal, is the turiya statethe elusive fourth level of human
consciousness. During the typical human experience, say the Yogis, most of us are always
moving between three different levels of consciousnesswaking, dreaming or deep dreamless
sleep. But there is a fourth level, too. This fourth level is the witness of all the other
states, the integral awareness that links the other three levels together. This is the pure consciousness,
an intelligent awareness that canfor examplereport your dreams back to you
in the morning when you wake up. You were gone, you were sleeping, but somebody was
watching over your dreams while you sleptwho was that witness? And who is the one who
is always standing outside the minds activity, observing its thoughts? Its simply God, say the
Yogis. And if you can move into that state of witness-consciousness, then you can be present
with God all the time. This constant awareness and experience of the God-presence within
can only happen on a fourth level of human consciousness, which is called turiya.
Heres how you can tell if youve reached the turiya stateif youre in a state of constant
bliss. One who is living from within turiya is not affected by the swinging moods of the mind,
nor fearful of time or harmed by loss. Pure, clean, void, tranquil, breathless, selfless, endless,
undecaying, steadfast, eternal, unborn, independent, he abides in his own greatness, say the
Upanishads, the ancient Yogic scriptures, describing anyone who has reached the turiya
state. The great saints, the great Gurus, the great prophets of historythey were all living in
the turiya state, all the time. As for the rest of us, most of us have been there, too, if only for
fleeting moments. Most of us, even if only for two minutes in our lives, have experienced at
some time or another an inexplicable and random sense of complete bliss, unrelated to anything
that was happening in the outside world. One instant, youre just a regular Joe, schlepping
through your mundane life, and then suddenlywhat is this?nothing has changed, yet
you feel stirred by grace, swollen with wonder, overflowing with bliss. Everythingfor no reason
whatsoeveris perfect.
Of course, for most of us this state passes as fast as it came. Its almost like you are
shown your inner perfection as a tease and then you tumble back to reality very quickly, collapsing
into a heap upon all your old worries and desires once again. Over the centuries,
people have tried to hold on to that state of blissful perfection through all sorts of external
meansthrough drugs and sex and power and adrenaline and the accumulation of pretty
thingsbut it doesnt keep. We search for happiness everywhere, but we are like Tolstoys
fabled beggar who spent his life sitting on a pot of gold, begging for pennies from every
passerby, unaware that his fortune was right under him the whole time. Your treasureyour
perfectionis within you already. But to claim it, you must leave the busy commotion of the
mind and abandon the desires of the ego and enter into the silence of the heart. The kundalini
shaktithe supreme energy of the divinewill take you there.
This is what everyone has come here for.
When I initially wrote that sentence, what I meant by it was: This is why these one hundred
retreat participants from all over the world have come to this Ashram in India. But actually,
the Yogic saints and philosophers would have agreed with the broadness of my original
statement: This is what everyone has come here for. According to the mystics, this search
for divine bliss is the entire purpose of a human life. This is why we all chose to be born, and
this is why all the suffering and pain of life on earth is worthwhilejust for the chance to experience
this infinite love. And once you have found this divinity within, can you hold it? Because
if you can . . . bliss.
I spend the entire retreat in the back of the temple, watching over the participants as they
meditate in the half-dark and total quiet. It is my job to be concerned about their comfort, paying
careful attention to see if anyone is in trouble or need. Theyve all taken vows of silence
for the duration of the retreat, and every day I can feel them descending deeper into that silence
until the entire Ashram is saturated with their stillness. Out of respect to the retreat participants,
we are all tiptoeing through our days now, even eating our meals in silence. All
traces of chatter are gone. Even I am quiet. There is a middle-of-the-night silence around
here now, the hushed timelessness you generally only experience around 3:00 AM when
youre totally aloneyet its carried through the broad daylight and held by the whole Ashram.
As these hundred souls meditate, I have no idea what theyre thinking or feeling, but I
know what they want to experience, and I find myself in a constant state of prayer to God on
their behalf, making odd bargains for them like, Please give these wonderful people any
blessings you might have originally set aside for me. Its not my intention to go into meditation
at the same time the retreat participants are meditating; Im supposed to be keeping an eye
on them, not worrying about my own spiritual journey. But I find myself every day lifted on the
waves of their collective devotional intention, much the same way that certain scavenging
birds can ride the thermal heat waves which rise off the earth, taking them much higher in the
air than they ever could have flown on their own wing-power. So its probably not surprising
that this is when it happens. One Thursday afternoon in the back of the temple, right in the
midst of my Key Hostess duties, wearing my name-tag and everythingI am suddenly transported
through the portal of the universe and taken to the center of Gods palm.
Eat, Pray, Love

 67


 As a reader and seeker, I always get frustrated at this moment in somebody elses spiritual
memoirsthat moment in which the soul excuses itself from time and place and merges with
the infinite. From the Buddha to Saint Teresa to the Sufi mystics to my own Guruso many
great souls over the centuries have tried to express in so many words what it feels like to become
one with the divine, but Im never quite satisfied by these descriptions. Often you will
see the maddening adjective indescribable used to describe the event. But even the most eloquent
reporters of the devotional experiencelike Rumi, who wrote about having abandoned
all effort and tied himself to Gods sleeve, or Hafiz, who said that he and God had become like
two fat men living in a small boatwe keep bumping into each other and laughingeven
these poets leave me behind. I dont want to read about it; I want to feel it, too. Sri Ramana
Maharshi, a beloved Indian Guru, used to give long talks on the transcendental experience to
his pupils and then always wrap it up with this instruction: Now go find out.
So now I have found out. And I dont want to say that what I experienced that Thursday afternoon
in India was indescribable, even though it was. Ill try to explain anyway. Simply put, I
got pulled through the wormhole of the Absolute, and in that rush I suddenly understood the
workings of the universe completely. I left my body, I left the room, I left the planet, I stepped
through time and I entered the void. I was inside the void, but I also was the void and I was
looking at the void, all at the same time. The void was a place of limitless peace and wisdom.
The void was conscious and it was intelligent. The void was God, which means that I was inside
God. But not in a gross, physical waynot like I was Liz Gilbert stuck inside a chunk of
Gods thigh muscle. I just was part of God. In addition to being God. I was both a tiny piece of
the universe and exactly the same size as the universe. (All know that the drop merges into
the ocean, but few know that the ocean merges into the drop, wrote the sage Kabirand I
can personally attest now that this is true.)
It wasnt hallucinogenic, what I was feeling. It was the most basic of events. It was heaven,
yes. It was the deepest love Id ever experienced, beyond anything I could have previously
imagined, but it wasnt euphoric. It wasnt exciting. There wasnt enough ego or passion
left in me to create euphoria and excitement. It was just obvious. Like when youve been look-
ing at an optical illusion for a long time, straining your eyes to decode the trick, and suddenly
your cognizance shifts and therenow you can clearly see it!the two vases are actually two
faces. And once youve seen through the optical illusion, you can never not see it again.
So this is God, I thought. Congratulations to meet you.
The place in which I was standing cant be described like an earthly location. It was
neither dark nor light, neither big nor small. Nor was it a place, nor was I technically standing
there, nor was I exactly I anymore. I still had my thoughts, but they were so modest, quiet
and observatory. Not only did I feel unhesitating compassion and unity with everything and
everybody, it was vaguely and amusingly strange for me to wonder how anybody could ever
feel anything but that. I also felt mildly charmed by all my old ideas about who I am and what
Im like. Im a woman, I come from America, Im talkative, Im a writerall this felt so cute and
obsolete. Imagine cramming yourself into such a puny box of identity when you could experience
your infinitude instead.
I wondered, Why have I been chasing happiness my whole life when bliss was here the
entire time?
I dont know how long I hovered in this magnificent ether of union before I had a sudden
urgent thought: I want to hold on to this experience forever! And thats when I started to
tumble out of it. Just those two little wordsI want!and I began to slide back to earth. Then
my mind started to really protestNo! I dont want to leave here!and I slid further still.
 I want!

 I dont want!

 I want!

 I dont want!

With each repetition of those desperate thoughts, I could feel myself falling through layer
after layer of illusion, like an action-comedy hero crashing through a dozen canvas awnings
during his fall from a building. This return of useless longing was bringing me back again into
my own small borders, my own mortal confines, my limited comic-strip world. I watched my
ego return the way you watch a Polaroid photo develop, instant-by-instant getting clear-
ertheres the face, there are the lines around the mouth, there are the eyebrowsyes, now
it is finished: there is a picture of regular old me. I felt a tremor of panic, mildly heartbroken to
have lost this divine experience. But exactly parallel to that panic I could also sense a witness,
a wiser and older me, who just shook her head and smiled, knowing this: If I believed
that this state of bliss was something that could be taken away from me, then I obviously
didnt understand it yet. And therefore, I was not yet ready to inhabit it completely. I would
have to practice more. At that moment of realization, thats when God let me go, let me slide
through His fingers with this last compassionate, unspoken message:
 You may return here once you have fully come to understand that you are always here.
Eat, Pray, Love

 68


 The retreat ended two days later, and everyone came out of silence. I got so many hugs
from people, thanking me for having helped them.
Oh, no! Thank you, I kept saying, frustrated at how inadequate those words sounded,
how impossible it was to express ample gratitude for their having lifted me to such a towering
height.
Another one hundred seekers arrived a week later for another retreat, and the teachings
and the brave endeavors inward and the all-encompassing silence were all repeated, with
new souls in practice. I watched over them, too, and tried to help in every possible way and
glided back into turiya a few times with them, too. I could only laugh later when many of them
came out of their meditations to tell me that I had appeared to them during the retreat as a
silent, gliding, ethereal presence. So this was the Ashrams final joke on me? Once I had
learned to accept my loud, chatty, social nature and fully embrace my inner Key Hostessonly
then could I become The Quiet Girl in the Back of the Temple, after all?
In my final weeks there, the Ashram was imbibed with a somewhat melancholy last-daysof-summer-camp
feeling. Every morning, it seemed, some more people and some more luggage
got on a bus and left. There were no new arrivals. It was almost May, the beginning of
the hottest season in India, and the place would be slowing down for a while. There would be
no more retreats, so I was relocated for work again, now placed in the Office of Registration,
where I had the bittersweet job of officially departing all my friends off the computer once
they had left the Ashram.
I shared the office with a funny former Madison Avenue hairdresser. Wed do our morning
prayers together all alone, just the two of us singing our hymn to God.
Think we could pick up the tempo on this hymn today? asked the hairdresser one morning.
And maybe raise it to a higher octave? So I dont sound like a spiritual version of Count
Basie?
Im getting a lot of time alone here now. Im spending about four or five hours every day in
the meditation caves. I can sit in my own company for hours at a time now, at ease in my own
presence, undisturbed by my own existence on the planet. Sometimes my meditations are
surreal and physical experiences of shaktiall spine-twisting, blood-boiling wildness. I try to
give in to it with as little resistance as possible. Other times I experience a sweet, quiet contentment,
and that is fine, too. The sentences still form in my mind, and thoughts still do their
little show-off dance, but I know my thought patterns so well now that they dont bother me
anymore. My thoughts have become like old neighbors, kind of bothersome but ultimately
rather endearingMr. and Mrs. Yakkity-Yak and their three dumb children, Blah, Blah and
Blah. But they dont agitate my home. Theres room for all of us in this neighborhood.
As for whatever other changes may have occurred within me during these last few
months, perhaps I cant even feel them yet. My friends who have been studying Yoga for a
long time say you dont really see the impact that an Ashram has had on you until you leave
the place and return to your normal life. Only then, said the former nun from South Africa,
will you start to notice how your interior closets have all been rearranged. Of course at the
moment, Im not entirely sure what my normal life is. I mean, Im maybe about to go move in
with an elderly medicine man in Indonesiais that my normal life? It may be, who knows? In
any case, though, my friends say that the changes appear only later. You may find that
lifelong obsessions are gone, or that nasty, indissoluble patterns have finally shifted. Petty irritations
that once maddened you are no longer problems, whereas abysmal old miseries you
once endured out of habit will no longer be tolerated now for even five minutes. Poisonous relationships
get aired out or disposed of, and brighter, more beneficial people start arriving into
your world.
Last night I couldnt sleep. Not out of anxiety, but out of thrilled anticipation. I got dressed
and went out for a walk through the gardens. The moon was lusciously ripe and full, and it
hovered right above me, spilling a pewtery light all around. The air was perfumed with jasmine
and also the intoxicating scent from this heady, flowery bush they have around here which
only blossoms in the night. The day had been humid and hot, and now it was only slightly less
humid and hot. The warm air shifted around me and I realized: Im in India!
 Im in my sandals and Im in India!

I took off at a run, galloping away from the path and down into the meadow, just tearing
across that moonlit bath of grass. My body felt so alive and healthy from all these months of
Yoga and vegetarian food and early bedtimes. My sandals on the soft dewy grass made this
sound: shippa-shippa-shippa-shippa, and that was the only sound in the whole valley. I was
so exultant I ran straight to the clump of eucalyptus trees in the middle of the park (where they
say an ancient temple used to stand, honoring the god Ganeshthe remover of obstacles)
and I threw my arms around one of those trees, which was still warm from the days heat, and
I kissed it with such passion. I mean, I kissed that tree with all my heart, not even thinking at
the time that this is the worst nightmare of every American parent whose child has ever run
away to India to find herselfthat she will end up having orgies with trees in the moonlight.
But it was pure, this love that I was feeling. It was godly. I looked around the darkened valley
and I could see nothing that was not God. I felt so deeply, terribly happy. I thought to myself,
Whatever this feeling isthis is what I have been praying for. And this is also what I
have been praying to.
Eat, Pray, Love

 69


 By the way, I found my word.
I found it in the library, of course, bookworm that I am. Id been wondering about my word
ever since that afternoon back in Rome when my Italian friend Giulio had told me that Romes
word is SEX, and had asked me what mine was. I didnt know the answer then, but kind of
figured my word would show up eventually, and that Id recognize it when I saw it.
So I saw it during my last week at the Ashram. I was reading through an old text about
Yoga, when I found a description of ancient spiritual seekers. A Sanskrit word appeared in the
paragraph: ANTEVASIN. It means one who lives at the border. In ancient times this was a
literal description. It indicated a person who had left the bustling center of worldly life to go live
at the edge of the forest where the spiritual masters dwelled. The antevasin was not one of
the villagers anymorenot a householder with a conventional life. But neither was he yet a
transcendentnot one of those sages who live deep in the unexplored woods, fully realized.
The antevasin was an in-betweener. He was a border-dweller. He lived in sight of both
worlds, but he looked toward the unknown. And he was a scholar.
When I read this description of the antevasin, I got so excited I gave a little bark of recognition.
Thats my word, baby! In the modern age, of course, that image of an unexplored forest
would have to be figurative, and the border would have to be figurative, too. But you can still
live there. You can still live on that shimmering line between your old thinking and your new
understanding, always in a state of learning. In the figurative sense, this is a border that is always
movingas you advance forward in your studies and realizations, that mysterious forest
of the unknown always stays a few feet ahead of you, so you have to travel light in order to
keep following it. You have to stay mobile, movable, supple. Slippery, even. Which is funny,
because just the day before, my friend the poet/plumber from New Zealand had left the
Ashram, and on his way out the door, hed handed me a friendly little good-bye poem about
my journey. I remembered this verse:
 Elizabeth, betwixt and between

 Italian phrases and Bali dreams,

 Elizabeth, between and betwixt,

 Sometimes as slippery as a fish . . .
Ive spent so much time these last years wondering what Im supposed to be. A wife? A
mother? A lover? A celibate? An Italian? A glutton? A traveler? An artist? A Yogi? But Im not
any of these things, at least not completely. And Im not Crazy Aunt Liz, either. Im just a slippery
antevasinbetwixt and betweena student on the ever-shifting border near the wonderful,
scary forest of the new.
Eat, Pray, Love

 70


 I believe that all the worlds religions share, at their core, a desire to find a transporting
metaphor. When you want to attain communion with God, what youre really trying to do is
move away from the worldly into the eternal (from the village to the forest, you might say,
keeping with the theme of the antevasin) and you need some kind of magnificent idea to convey
you there. It has be a big one, this metaphorreally big and magic and powerful, because
it needs to carry you across a mighty distance. It has to be the biggest boat imaginable.
Religious rituals often develop out of mystical experimentation. Some brave scout goes
looking for a new path to the divine, has a transcendent experience and returns home a
prophet. He or she brings back to the community tales of heaven and maps of how to get
there. Then others repeat the words, the works, the prayers, or the acts of this prophet, in order
to cross over, too. Sometimes this is successfulsometimes the same familiar combination
of syllables and devotional practices repeated generation after generation might carry
many people to the other side. Sometimes it doesnt work, though. Inevitably even the most
original new ideas will eventually harden into dogma or stop working for everybody.
The Indians around here tell a cautionary fable about a great saint who was always surrounded
in his Ashram by loyal devotees. For hours a day, the saint and his followers would
meditate on God. The only problem was that the saint had a young cat, an annoying creature,
who used to walk through the temple meowing and purring and bothering everyone during
meditation. So the saint, in all his practical wisdom, commanded that the cat be tied to a pole
outside for a few hours a day, only during meditation, so as to not disturb anyone. This became
a habittying the cat to the pole and then meditating on Godbut as years passed,
the habit hardened into religious ritual. Nobody could meditate unless the cat was tied to the
pole first. Then one day the cat died. The saints followers were panic-stricken. It was a major
religious crisishow could they meditate now, without a cat to tie to a pole? How would they
reach God? In their minds, the cat had become the means.
Be very careful, warns this tale, not to get too obsessed with the repetition of religious ritual
just for its own sake. Especially in this divided world, where the Taliban and the Christian
Coalition continue to fight out their international trademark war over who owns the rights to
the word God and who has the proper rituals to reach that God, it may be useful to remember
that it is not the tying of the cat to the pole that has ever brought anyone to transcendence,
but only the constant desire of an individual seeker to experience the eternal compassion of
the divine. Flexibility is just as essential for divinity as is discipline.
Your job, then, should you choose to accept it, is to keep searching for the metaphors,
rituals and teachers that will help you move ever closer to divinity. The Yogic scriptures say
that God responds to the sacred prayers and efforts of human beings in any way whatsoever
that mortals choose to worshipjust so long as those prayers are sincere. As one line from
the Upanishads suggests: People follow different paths, straight or crooked, according to
their temperament, depending on which they consider best, or most appropriateand all
reach You, just as rivers enter the ocean.
The other objective of religion, of course, is to try to make sense of our chaotic world and
explain the inexplicabilities we see playing out here on earth every day: the innocent suffer,
the wicked are rewardedwhat are we to make of all this? The Western tradition says, Itll all
get sorted out after death, in heaven and hell. (All justice to be doled out, of course, by what
James Joyces used to call the Hangman Goda paternal figure who sits upon His strict
seat of judgment punishing the evil and rewarding the good.) Over in the East, though, the
Upanishads shrug away any attempt to make sense of the worlds chaos. Theyre not even so
sure that the world is chaotic, but suggest that it may only appear so to us, because of our
limited vision. These texts do not promise justice or revenge for anybody, though they do say
that there are consequences for every actionso choose your behavior accordingly. You
might not see those consequences any time soon, though. Yoga takes the long view, always.
Furthermore, the Upanishads suggest that so-called chaos may have an actual divine function,
even if you personally cant recognize it right now: The gods are fond of the cryptic and
dislike the evident. The best we can do, then, in response to our incomprehensible and dangerous
world, is to practice holding equilibrium internallyno matter what insanity is transpiring
out there.
Sean, my Yogic Irish dairy farmer, explained it to me this way. Imagine that the universe
is a great spinning engine, he said. You want to stay near the core of the thingright in the
hub of the wheelnot out at the edges where all the wild whirling takes place, where you get
can frayed and crazy. The hub of calmnessthats your heart. Thats where God lives within
you. So stop looking for answers in the world. Just keep coming back to that center and youll
always find peace.
Nothing has ever made more sense to me, spiritually speaking, than this idea. It works for
me. And if I ever find anything that works better, I assure youI will use it.
I have many friends in New York who are not religious people. Most, I would say. Either
they fell away from the spiritual teachings of their youth or they never grew up with any God to
begin with. Naturally, some of them are a bit freaked out by my newfound efforts to reach holiness.
Jokes are made, of course. As my friend Bobby quipped once while he was trying to fix
my computer: No offense to your aura, but you still dont know shit about downloading software.
I roll with the jokes. I think its all funny, too. Of course it is.
What Im seeing in some of my friends, though, as they are aging, is a longing to have
something to believe in. But this longing chafes against any number of obstacles, including
their intellect and common sense. Despite all their intellect, though, these people still live in a
world that careens about in a series of wild and devastating and completely nonsensical
lurches. Great and horrible experiences of either suffering or joy occur in the lives of all these
people, just as with the rest of us, and these mega-experiences tend to make us long for a
spiritual context in which to express either lament or gratitude, or to seek understanding. The
problem iswhat to worship, whom to pray to?
I have a dear friend whose first child was born right after his beloved mother died. After
this confluence of miracle and loss, my friend felt a desire to have some kind of sacred place
to go, or some ritual to perform, in order to sort through all the emotion. My friend was a Catholic
by upbringing, but couldnt stomach returning to the church as an adult. (I cant buy it
anymore, he said, knowing what I know.) Of course, hed be embarrassed to become a
Hindu or a Buddhist or something wacky like that. So what could he do? As he told me, You
dont want to go cherry-picking a religion.
Which is a sentiment I completely respect except for the fact that I totally disagree. I think
you have every right to cherry-pick when it comes to moving your spirit and finding peace in
God. I think you are free to search for any metaphor whatsoever which will take you across
the worldly divide whenever you need to be transported or comforted. Its nothing to be embarrassed
about. Its the history of mankinds search for holiness. If humanity never evolved in
its exploration of the divine, a lot of us would still be worshipping golden Egyptian statues of
cats. And this evolution of religious thinking does involve a fair bit of cherry-picking. You take
whatever works from wherever you can find it, and you keep moving toward the light.
The Hopi Indians thought that the worlds religions each contained one spiritual thread,
and that these threads are always seeking each other, wanting to join. When all the threads
are finally woven together they will form a rope that will pull us out of this dark cycle of history
and into the next realm. More contemporarily, the Dalai Lama has repeated the same idea,
assuring his Western students repeatedly that they neednt become Tibetan Buddhists in order
to be his pupils. He welcomes them to take whatever ideas they like out of Tibetan
Buddhism and integrate these ideas into their own religious practices. Even in the most un-
likely and conservative of places, you can find sometimes this glimmering idea that God might
be bigger than our limited religious doctrines have taught us. In 1954, Pope Pius XI, of all
people, sent some Vatican delegates on a trip to Libya with these written instructions: Do
NOT think that you are going among Infidels. Muslims attain salvation, too. The ways of
Providence are infinite.
But doesnt that make sense? That the infinite would be, indeed . . . infinite? That even the
most holy amongst us would only be able to see scattered pieces of the eternal picture at any
given time? And that maybe if we could collect those pieces and compare them, a story about
God would begin to emerge that resembles and includes everyone? And isnt our individual
longing for transcendence all just part of this larger human search for divinity? Dont we each
have the right to not stop seeking until we get as close to the source of wonder as possible?
Even if it means coming to India and kissing trees in the moonlight for a while?
Thats me in the corner, in other words. Thats me in the spotlight. Choosing my religion.
Eat, Pray, Love

 71


 My flight leaves India at four in the morning, which is typical of how India works. I decide
not to go to sleep at all that night, but to spend the whole evening in one of the meditation
caves, in prayer. Im not a late-night person by nature, but something in me wants to stay
awake for these last hours at the Ashram. There are many things in my life Ive stayed up all
night to doto make love, to argue with someone, to drive long distances, to dance, to cry, to
worry (and sometimes all those things, in fact, in the course of one night)but Ive never sacrificed
sleep for a night of exclusive prayer. Why not now?
I pack my bag and leave it by the temple gate, so I can be ready to grab it and go when
the taxi arrives before dawn. And then I walk up the hill, I go into the meditation cave and I sit.
Im alone in there, but I sit where I can see the big photograph of Swamiji, my Gurus master,
the founder of this Ashram, the long-gone lion who is somehow still here. I close my eyes and
let the mantra come. I climb down that ladder into my own hub of stillness. When I get there, I
can feel the world halt, the way I always wanted it to halt when I was nine years old and panicking
about the relentlessness of time. In my heart, the clock stops and the calendar pages
quit flying off the wall. I sit in silent wonder at all I understand. I am not actively praying. I have
become a prayer.
I can sit here all night.
In fact, I do.
I dont know what alerts me when its time to go meet my taxi, but after several hours of
stillness, something gives me a nudge, and when I look at my watch its exactly time to go. I
have to fly to Indonesia now. How funny and strange. So I stand up and bow before the photograph
of Swamijithe bossy, the marvelous, the fiery. And then I slide a piece of paper under
the carpet, right below his image. On the paper are the two poems I wrote during my four
months in India. These are the first real poems Ive ever written. A plumber from New Zealand
encouraged me to try poetry for oncethats why it happened. One of these poems I wrote
after having been here only a month. The other, I just wrote this morning.
In the space between the two poems, I have found acres of grace.
Eat, Pray, Love

 72


 Two Poems from an Ashram in India
 First

 All this talk of nectar and bliss is starting to piss me off.

 I dont know about you, my friend,

 but my path to God aint no sweet waft of incense.

 Its a cat set loose in a pigeon pen,

 and Im the cat
 but also them who yell like hell when they get pinned.

 My path to God is a workers uprising,

 wont be peace till they unionize.

 Their picket is so fearsome

 the National Guard wont go near them.

 My path was beaten unconscious before me,

 by a small brown man I never got to see,

 who chased God through India, shin-deep in mud,

 barefoot and famined, malarial blood,

 sleeping in doorways, under bridgesa hobo.

 (Which is short for homeward bound, you know)

 And he now chases me, saying: Got it yet, Liz?

 What HOMEWARD means? What BOUND really is?


 Second

 However.

 If theyd let me wear pants made out of the

 fresh-mown grass from this place,

 Id do it.

 If theyd let me make out

 with every single Eucalyptus tree in Ganeshs Grove,

 I swear, Id do it.

 Ive sweated out dew these days,

 worked out the dregs,

 rubbed my chin on tree bark,

 mistaking it for my masters leg.

 I cant get far enough in.

 If theyd let me eat the soil of this place

 served on a bed of birds nests,

 Id finish only half my plate,

 Then sleep all night on the rest.

Eat, Pray, Love
Eat, Pray, Love

 73


 Ive never had less of a plan in my life than I do upon arrival in Bali. In all my history of
careless travels, this is the most carelessly Ive ever landed anyplace. I dont know where Im
going to live, I dont know what Im going to do, I dont know what the exchange rate is, I dont
know how to get a taxi at the airportor even where to ask that taxi to take me. Nobody is expecting
my arrival. I have no friends in Indonesia, or even friends-of-friends. And heres the
problem about traveling with an out-of-date guidebook, and then not reading it anyway: I
didnt realize that Im actually not allowed to stay in Indonesia for four months, even if I want
to. I find this out only upon entry into the country. Turns out Im allowed only a one-month
tourist visa. It hadnt occurred to me that the Indonesian government would be anything less
than delighted to host me in their country for just as long as I pleased to stay.
As the nice immigration official is stamping my passport with permission to stay in Bali for
only and exactly thirty days, I ask him in my most friendly manner if I can please remain
longer.
No, he says, in his most friendly manner. The Balinese are famously friendly.
See, Im supposed to stay here for three or four months, I tell him.
I dont mention that its a prophecythat my staying here for three or four months was
predicted two years ago by an elderly and quite possibly demented Balinese medicine man,
during a ten-minute palm-reading. Im not sure how to explain this.
But what did that medicine man tell me, now that I think of it? Did he actually say that I
would come back to Bali and spend three or four months living with him? Did he really say
living with him? Or did he just want me to drop by again sometime if I was in the neighborhood
and give him another ten bucks for another palm-reading? Did he say I would come
back, or that I should come back? Did he really say, See you later, alligator? Or was it, In a
while, crocodile?
I havent had any communication with the medicine man since that one evening. I wouldnt
know how to contact him, anyway. What might his address be? Medicine Man, On His Porch,
Bali, Indonesia? I dont know whether hes dead or alive. I remember that he seemed exceedingly
old two years ago when we met; anything could have happened to him since then.
All I have for sure is his nameKetut Liyerand the memory that he lives in a village just
outside the town of Ubud. But I dont remember the name of the village.
Maybe I should have thought all this through better.
Eat, Pray, Love

 74


 But Bali is a fairly simple place to navigate. Its not like Ive landed in the middle of the Sudan
with no idea of what to do next. This is an island approximately the size of Delaware and
its a popular tourist destination. The whole place has arranged itself to help you, the Westerner
with the credit cards, get around with ease. English is spoken here widely and happily.(Which
makes me feel guiltily relieved. My brain synapses are so overloaded by my efforts
to learn modern Italian and ancient Sanskrit during these last few months that I just cant
take on the task of trying to learn Indonesian or, even more difficult, Balinesea language
more complex than Martian.) Its really no trouble being here. You can change your money at
the airport, find a taxi with a nice driver who will suggest to you a lovely hotelnone of this is
hard to arrange. And since the tourism industry collapsed in the wake of the terrorist bombing
here two years ago (which happened a few weeks after Id left Bali the first time), its even
easier to get around now; everyone is desperate to help you, desperate for work.
So I take a taxi to the town of Ubud, which seems like a good place to start my journey. I
check into a small and pretty hotel there on the fabulously named Monkey Forest Road. The
hotel has a sweet swimming pool and a garden crammed with tropical flowers with blossoms
bigger than volleyballs (tended to by a highly organized team of hummingbirds and butter-flies).
The staff is Balinese, which means they automatically start adoring you and complimenting
you on your beauty as soon as you walk in. The room has a view of the tropical treetops
and theres a breakfast included every morning with piles of fresh tropical fruit. In short,
its one of the nicest places Ive ever stayed and its costing me less than ten dollars a day.
Its good to be back.
Ubud is in the center of Bali, located in the mountains, surrounded by terraced rice paddies
and innumerable Hindu temples, with rivers that cut fast through deep canyons of jungle
and volcanoes visible on the horizon. Ubud has long been considered the cultural hub of the
island, the place where traditional Balinese painting, dance, carving, and religious ceremonies
thrive. It isnt near any beaches, so the tourists who come to Ubud are a self-selecting and
rather classy crowd; they would prefer to see an ancient temple ceremony than to drink pia
coladas in the surf. Regardless of what happens with my medicine man prophecy, this could
be a lovely place to live for a while. The town is sort of like a small Pacific version of Santa
Fe, only with monkeys walking around and Balinese families in traditional dress all over the
place. There are good restaurants and nice little bookstores. I could feasibly spend my whole
time here in Ubud doing what nice divorced American women have been doing with their time
ever since the invention of the YWCAsigning up for one class after another: batik, drumming,
jewelry-making, pottery, traditional Indonesian dance and cooking . . . Right across the
road from my hotel theres even something called The Meditation Shopa small storefront
with a sign advertising open meditation sessions every night from 6:00 to 7:00. May peace
prevail on earth, reads the sign. Im all for it.
By the time I unpack my bags its still early afternoon, so I decide to take myself for a walk,
get reoriented to this town I havent seen in two years. And then Ill try to figure out how to
start finding my medicine man. I imagine this will be a difficult task, might take days or even
weeks. Im not sure where to start with my search, so I stop at the front desk on my way out
and ask Mario if he can help me.
Mario is one of the guys who work at this hotel. I already made friends with him when I
checked in, largely on account of his name. Not too long ago I was traveling in a country
where many men were named Mario, but not one of them was a small, muscular, energetic
Balinese fellow wearing a silk sarong and a flower behind his ear. So I had to ask, Is your
name really Mario? That doesnt sound very Indonesian.
Not my real name, he said. My real name is Nyoman.
AhI should have known. I should have known that I would have a 25 percent chance of
guessing Marios real name. In Bali, if I may digress, there are only four names that the majority
of the population give to their children, regardless of whether the baby is a boy or a girl.
The names are Wayan (pronounced Why-Ann), Made (mah-DAY), Nyoman and Ketut.
Translated, these names mean simply First, Second, Third and Fourth, and they connote birth
order. If you have a fifth child, you start the name cycle all over again, so that the fifth child is
really known as something like: Wayan to the Second Power. And so forth. If you have
twins, you name them in the order they came out. Because there are basically only four
names in Bali (higher-caste elites have their own selection of names) its totally possible
(indeed, quite common) that two Wayans would marry each other. And then their firstborn
would be named, of course: Wayan.
This gives a slight indication of how important family is in Bali, and how important your
placement in that family is. You would think this system could become complicated, but somehow
the Balinese work it out. Understandably and necessarily, nicknaming is popular. For instance,
one of the most successful businesswomen in Ubud is a lady named Wayan who has
a busy restaurant called Caf Wayan, and so she is known as Wayan Cafmeaning, The
Wayan who owns Caf Wayan. Somebody else might be known as Fat Made, or NyomanRental-Car
or Stupid-Ketut-Who-Burned-Down-His-Uncles-House. My new Balinese friend
Mario got around the problem by simply naming himself Mario.
Why Mario?
Because I love everything Italian, he said.
When I told him that Id recently spent four months in Italy, he found this fact so stupendously
amazing that he came out from behind his desk and said, Come, sit, talk. I came,
I sat, we talked. And thats how we became friends.
So this afternoon I decide to start my search for my medicine man by asking my new
friend Mario if by any chance he knows a man by the name of Ketut Liyer.
Mario frowns, thinking.
I wait for him to say something like, Ah, yes! Ketut Liyer! Old medicine man who died just
last weekso sad when venerable old medicine man passes away . . .
Mario asks me to repeat the name, and this time I write it down, assuming Im pronouncing
something wrong. Sure enough, Mario brightens in recognition. Ketut Liyer!
Now I wait for him to say something like, Ah, yes! Ketut Liyer! Insane person! Arrested
last week for being a crazy man . . .
But he says instead, Ketut Liyer is famous healer.
Yes! Thats him!
I know him. I go in his house. Last week I take my cousin, she needs cure for her baby
crying all night. Ketut Liyer fixes it. One time I took American girl like you to Ketut Liyers
house. Girl wanted magic to make her more beautiful to men. Ketut Liyer draw magic painting,
for help her be more beautiful. I tease her after that. Every day I tell her, Painting working!
Look how beautiful you are! Painting working! 
Remembering the image Ketut Liyer had drawn for me a few years ago, I tell Mario that Id
gotten a magic picture myself from the medicine man once.
Mario laughs. Painting working for you, too!
My picture was to help me find God, I explain.
You dont want to be more beautiful to men? he asks, understandably confused.
I say, Hey, Mariodo you think you could take me to visit Ketut Liyer someday? If youre
not too busy?
Not now, he says.
Just as Im starting to feel disappointed, he adds, But maybe in five minutes?
Eat, Pray, Love

 75


 So this is how it comes to pass thatthe very afternoon I have arrived in BaliIm suddenly
on the back of a motorbike, clutching my new friend Mario the Italian-Indonesian, who is
speeding me through the rice terraces toward Ketut Liyers home. For all that Ive thought
about this reunion with the medicine man over the last two years, I actually have no idea what
Im going to say to him when I arrive. And of course we dont have an appointment. So we
show up unannounced. I recognize the sign outside his door, same as last time, saying:
Ketut Liyerpainter. Its a typical, traditional Balinese family compound. A high stone wall
surrounds the entire property, theres a courtyard in the middle and a temple in the back. Several
generations live out their lives together in the various interconnected small homes within
these walls. We enter without knocking (no door, anyway) to the riotous dismay of a some
typical Balinese watchdogs (skinny, angry) and there in the courtyard is Ketut Liyer the elderly
medicine man, wearing his sarong and his golf shirt, looking precisely the same as he did two
years ago when I first met him. Mario says something to Ketut, and Im not exactly fluent in
Balinese, but it sounds like a general introduction, something along the lines of, Heres a girl
from Americago for it.
Ketut turns his mostly toothless smile upon me with the force of a compassionate fire
hose, and this is so reassuring: I had remembered correctly, he is extraordinary. His face is a
comprehensive encyclopedia of kindness. He shakes my hand with an excited and powerful
grip.
I am very happy to meet you, he says.
He has no idea who I am.
Come, come, he says, and Im ushered to the porch of his little house, where woven
bamboo mats serve as furniture. It looks exactly as it did two years ago. We both sit down.
With no hesitation, he takes my palm in his handassuming that, like most of his Western
visitors, a palm-reading is what Ive come for. He gives me a quick reading, which I am reassured
to see is an abridged version of exactly what he said to me last time. (He may not remember
my face, but my destiny, to his practiced eye, is unchanged.) His English is better
than I remembered, and also better than Marios. Ketut speaks like the wise old Chinamen in
classic kung fu movies, a form of English you could call Grasshopperese, because you
could insert the endearment Grasshopper into the middle of any sentence and it sounds
very wise. Ahyou have very lucky good fortune, Grasshopper . . .
I wait for a pause in Ketuts predictions, then interrupt to remind him that I had been here
to see him already, two years ago.
He looks puzzled. Not first time in Bali?
No, sir.
He thinks hard. You girl from California?
No, I say, my spirits tumbling deeper. Im the girl from New York.
Ketut says to me (and Im not sure what this has to do with anything), I am not so handsome
anymore, lost many teeth. Maybe I will go to dentist someday, get new teeth. But too
afraid of dentist.
He opens his deforested mouth and shows me the damage. Indeed, he has lost most of
his teeth on the left side of his mouth and on the right side its all broken, hurtful-looking yellow
stubs. He fell down, he tells me. Thats how his teeth got knocked out.
I tell him Im sorry to hear it, then try again, speaking slowly. I dont think you remember
me, Ketut. I was here two years ago with an American Yoga teacher, a woman who lived in
Bali for many years.
He smiles, elated. I know Ann Barros!
Thats right. Ann Barros is the Yoga teachers name. But Im Liz. I came here asking for
your help once because I wanted to get closer to God. You drew me a magic picture.
He shrugs amiably, couldnt be less concerned. Dont remember, he says.
This is such bad news its almost funny. What am I going to do in Bali now? I dont know
exactly what Id imagined it would be like to meet Ketut again, but I did hope wed have some
sort of super-karmic tearful reunion. And while its true I had feared he might be dead, it
hadnt occurred to me thatif he were still alivehe wouldnt remember me at all. Although
now it seems the height of dumbness to have ever imagined that our first meeting would have
been as memorable for him as it was for me. Maybe I should have planned this better, for
real.
So I describe the picture he had made for me, the figure with the four legs (so grounded
on earth) and the missing head (not looking at the world through the intellect) and the face
in the heart (looking at the world through the heart) and he listens to me politely, with modest
interest, like were discussing somebody elses life entirely.
I hate to do this because I dont want to put him on the spot, but its got to be said, so I just
lay it out there. I say, You told me I should come back here to Bali. You told me to stay here
for three or four months. You said I could help you learn English and you would teach me the
things that you know. I dont like the way my voice soundsjust the teensiest bit desperate. I
dont mention anything about the invitation hed once floated for me to live with his family.
That seems way out of line, given the circumstances.
He listens to me politely, smiling and shaking his head, like, Isnt it so funny the things
people say?
I almost drop it then. But Ive come so far, I have to put forth one last effort. I say, Im the
book writer, Ketut. Im the book writer from New York.
And for some reason that does it. Suddenly his face goes translucent with joy, turns bright
and pure and transparent. A Roman candle of recognition sparks to life in his mind. YOU! he
says. YOU! I remember YOU! He leans forward, takes my shoulders in his hands and starts
to shake me happily, the way a child shakes an unopened Christmas present to try to guess
whats inside. You came back! You came BACK!
I came back! I came back! I say.
You, you, you!
Me, me, me!
Im all tearful now, but trying not to show it. The depth of my reliefits hard to explain. It
takes even me by surprise. Its like thisits like I was in a car accident, and my car went over
a bridge and sank to the bottom of a river and Id somehow managed to free myself from the
sunken car by swimming through an open window and then Id been frog-kicking and struggling
to swim all the way up to the daylight through the cold, green water and I was almost out
of oxygen and the arteries were bursting out of my neck and my cheeks were puffed with my
last breath and thenGASP!I broke through to the surface and took in huge gulps of air.
And I survived. That gasp, that breaking throughthis is what it feels like when I hear the Indonesian
medicine man say, You came back! My relief is exactly that big.
I cant believe it worked.
Yes, I came back, I say. Of course I came back.
I so happy! he says. Were holding hands and hes wildly excited now. I do not remember
you at first! So long ago we meet! You look different now! So different from two years!
Last time, you very sad-looking woman. Nowso happy! Like different person!
The idea of thisthe idea of a person looking so different after a mere two years have
passedseems to incite in him a shiver of giggles.
I give up trying to hide my tearfulness and just let it all spill over. Yes, Ketut. I was very
sad before. But life is better now.
Last time you in bad divorce. No good.
No good, I confirm.
Last time you have too much worry, too much sorrow. Last time, you look like sad old woman.
Now you look like young girl. Last time you ugly! Now you pretty!
Mario bursts into ecstatic applause and pronounces victoriously: See? Painting working!
I say, Do you still want me to help you with your English, Ketut?
He tells me I can start helping him right now and hops up nimbly, gnome-like. He bounds
into his little house and comes back with a pile of letters hes received from abroad over the
last few years (so he does have an address!). He asks me to read the letters aloud to him; he
can understand English well, but cant read much. Im his secretary already. Im a medicine
mans secretary. This is fabulous. The letters are from art collectors overseas, from people
who have somehow managed to acquire his famous magic drawings and magic paintings.
One letter is from a collector in Australia, praising Ketut for his painting skills, saying, How
can you be so clever to paint with such detail? Ketut answers to me, like giving dictation:
Because I practice many, many years.
When the letters are finished, he updates me on his life over the last few years. Some
changes have occurred. Now he has a wife, for instance. He points across the courtyard at a
heavyset woman whos been standing in the shadow of her kitchen door, glaring at me like
shes not sure if she should shoot me, or poison me first and then shoot me. Last time I was
here, Ketut had sadly shown me photographs of his wife who had recently dieda beautiful
old Balinese woman who seemed bright and childlike even at her advanced age. I wave
across the courtyard to the new wife, who backs away into her kitchen.
Good woman, Ketut proclaims toward the kitchen shadows. Very good woman.
He goes on to say that hes been very busy with his Balinese patients, always a lot to do,
has to give much magic for new babies, ceremonies for dead people, healing for sick people,
ceremonies for marriage. Next time he goes to Balinese wedding, he says, We can go together!
I take you! The only thing is, he doesnt have very many Westerners visiting him anymore.
Nobody comes to visit Bali since the terrorist bombing. This makes him feel very confusing
in my head. This also makes him feel very empty in my bank. He says, You come to
my house every day to practice English with me now? I nod happily and he says, I will teach
you Balinese meditation, OK?
OK, I say.
I think three months enough time to teach you Balinese meditation, find God for you this
way, he says. Maybe four months. You like Bali?
I love Bali.
You get married in Bali?
Not yet.
I think maybe soon. You come back tomorrow?
I promise to. He doesnt say anything about my moving in with his family, so I dont bring it
up, stealing one last glance at the scary wife in the kitchen. Maybe Ill just stay in my sweet
hotel the whole time, instead. Its more comfortable, anyway. Plumbing, and all that. Ill need a
bicycle, though, to come see him every day . . .
So now its time to go.
I am very happy to meet you, he says, shaking my hand.
I offer up my first English lesson. I teach him the difference between happy to meet you,
and happy to see you. I explain that we only say Nice to meet you the first time we meet
somebody. After that, we say Nice to see you, every time. Because you only meet someone
once. But now we will see each other repeatedly, day after day.
He likes this. He gives it a practice round: Nice to see you! I am happy to see you! I can
see you! I am not deaf!
This makes us all laugh, even Mario. We shake hands, and agree that I will come by again
tomorrow afternoon. Until then, he says, See you later, alligator.
In a while, crocodile, I say.
Let your conscience be your guide. If you have any Western friend come to Bali, send
them to me for palm-readingI am very empty now in my bank since the bomb. I am an autodidact.
I am very happy to see you, Liss!
I am very happy to see you, too, Ketut.
Eat, Pray, Love

 76


 Bali is a tiny Hindu island located in the middle of the two-thousand-mile-long Indonesian
archipelago that constitutes the most populous Muslim nation on earth. Bali is therefore a
strange and wondrous thing; it should not even exist, yet does. The islands Hinduism was an
export from India by way of Java. Indian traders brought the religion east during the fourth
century AD. The Javanese kings founded a mighty Hindu dynasty, little of which remains
today except the impressive temple ruins at Borobudur. In the sixteenth century, a violent Islamic
uprising swept across the region and the Shiva-worshipping Hindu royalty escaped
Java, fleeing to Bali in droves during what would be remembered as the Majapahit Exodus.
The high-class, high-caste Javanese brought with them to Bali only their royal families, their
craftsmen and their priestsand so it is not a wild exaggeration when people say that everyone
in Bali is the descendent of either a king, a priest or an artist, and that this is why the
Balinese have such pride and brilliance.
The Javanese colonists brought their Hindu caste system with them to Bali, though caste
divisions were never as brutally enforced here as they once were in India. Still, the Balinese
recognize a complex social hierarchy (there are five divisions of Brahmans alone) and I would
have better luck personally decoding the human genome than trying to understand the intricate,
interlocking clan system that still thrives here. (The writer Fred B. Eisemans many fine
essays on Balinese culture go much further into expert detail explaining these subtleties, and
it is from his research that I take most of my general information, not only here but throughout
this book.) Suffice it to say for our purposes that everyone in Bali is in a clan, that everyone
knows which clan he is in, and that everyone knows which clan everyone else is in. And if you
get kicked out of your clan for some grave disobedience, you really might as well jump into a
volcano, because, honestly, youre as good as dead.
Balinese culture is one of the most methodical systems of social and religious organization
on earth, a magnificent beehive of tasks and roles and ceremonies. The Balinese are lodged,
completely held, within an elaborate lattice of customs. A combination of several factors created
this network, but basically we can say that Bali is what happens when the lavish rituals of
traditional Hinduism are superimposed over a vast rice-growing agricultural society that oper-
ates, by necessity, with elaborate communal cooperation. Rice terraces require an unbelievable
amount of shared labor, maintenance and engineering in order to prosper, so each
Balinese village has a banjara united organization of citizens who administer, through consensus,
the villages political and economic and religious and agricultural decisions. In Bali,
the collective is absolutely more important than the individual, or nobody eats.
Religious ceremonies are of paramount importance here in Bali (an island, dont forget,
with seven unpredictable volcanoes on ityou would pray, too). It has been estimated that a
typical Balinese woman spends one-third of her waking hours either preparing for a ceremony,
participating in a ceremony or cleaning up after a ceremony. Life here is a constant
cycle of offerings and rituals. You must perform them all, in correct order and with the correct
intention, or the entire universe will fall out of balance. Margaret Mead wrote about the incredible
busy-ness of the Balinese, and its truethere is rarely an idle moment in a Balinese
compound. There are ceremonies here which must be performed five times a day and others
that must be performed once a day, once a week, once a month, once a year, once every ten
years, once every hundred years, once every thousand years. All these dates and rituals are
kept organized by the priests and holy men, who consult a byzantine system of three separate
calendars.
There are thirteen major rites of passage for every human being in Bali, each marked by a
highly organized ceremony. Elaborate spiritual appeasement ceremonies are conducted all
throughout life, in order to protect the soul from the 108 vices (108theres that number
again!), which include such spoilers as violence, stealing, laziness and lying. Every Balinese
child passes through a momentous puberty ceremony in which the canine teeth, or fangs,
are filed down to a flat level, for aesthetic improvement. The worst thing you can be in Bali is
coarse and animalistic, and these fangs are considered to be reminders of our more brutal
natures and therefore must go. It is dangerous in such a close-knit culture for people to be
brutal. A villages entire web of cooperation could be sliced through by one persons murderous
intent. Therefore the best thing you can be in Bali is alus, which means refined, or even
prettified. Beauty is good in Bali, for men and women. Beauty is revered. Beauty is safety.
Children are taught to approach all hardship and discomfort with a shining face, a giant
smile.
The whole idea of Bali is a matrix, a massive and invisible grid of spirits, guides, paths and
customs. Every Balinese knows exactly where he or she belongs, oriented within this great,
intangible map. Just look at the four names of almost every Balinese citizenFirst, Second,
Third, Fourthreminding them all of when they were born in the family, and where they belong.
You couldnt have a clearer social mapping system if you called your kids North, South,
East and West. Mario, my new Italian-Indonesian friend, told me that he is only happy when
he can maintain himselfmentally and spirituallyat the intersection between a vertical line
and horizontal one, in a state of perfect balance. For this, he needs to know exactly where he
is located at every moment, both in his relationship to the divine and to his family here on
earth. If he loses that balance, he loses his power.
Its not a ludicrous hypothesis, therefore, to say that the Balinese are the global masters of
balance, the people for whom the maintenance of perfect equilibrium is an art, a science and
a religion. For me, on a personal search for balance, I had hoped to learn much from the
Balinese about holding steady in this chaotic world. But the more I read and see about this
culture, the more I realize how far off the grid of balance Ive fallen, at least from the Balinese
perspective. My habit of wandering through this world oblivious to my physical orientation, in
addition to my decision to have stepped outside the containing network of marriage and family,
makes mefor Balinese purposessomething like a ghost. I enjoy living this way, but its
a nightmare of a life by the standards of any self-respecting Balinese. If you dont know where
you are or whose clan you belong to, then how can you possibly find balance?
Given all this, Im not so sure how much of the Balinese worldview Im going to be able to
incorporate into my own worldview, since at the moment I seem to be taking a more modern
and Western definition of the word equilibrium. (Im currently translating it as meaning equal
freedom, or the equal possibility of falling in any direction at any given time, depending on . .
. you know . . . how things go.) The Balinese dont wait and see how things go. That would
be terrifying. They organize how things go, in order to keep things from falling apart.
When you are walking down the road in Bali and you pass a stranger, the very first question
he or she will ask you is, Where are you going? The second question is, Where are you
coming from? To a Westerner, this can seem like a rather invasive inquiry from a perfect
stranger, but theyre just trying to get an orientation on you, trying to insert you into the grid for
the purposes of security and comfort. If you tell them that you dont know where youre going,
or that youre just wandering about randomly, you might instigate a bit of distress in the heart
of your new Balinese friend. Its far better to pick some kind of specific directionanywherejust
so everybody feels better.
The third question a Balinese will almost certainly ask you is, Are you married? Again,
its a positioning and orienting inquiry. Its necessary for them to know this, to make sure that
you are completely in order in your life. They really want you to say yes. Its such a relief to
them when you say yes. If youre single, its better not to say so directly. And I really recommend
that you not mention your divorce at all, if you happen to have had one. It just makes
the Balinese so worried. The only thing your solitude proves to them is your perilous dislocation
from the grid. If you are a single woman traveling through Bali and somebody asks you,
Are you married? the best possible answer is: Not yet. This is a polite way of saying, No,
while indicating your optimistic intentions to get that taken care of just as soon as you can.
Even if you are eighty years old, or a lesbian, or a strident feminist, or a nun, or an eightyyear-old
strident feminist lesbian nun who has never been married and never intends to get
married, the politest possible answer is still: Not yet.
Eat, Pray, Love

 77


 In the morning, Mario helps me buy a bicycle. Like a proper almost-Italian, he says, I know
a guy, and he takes me to his cousins shop, where I get a nice mountain bike, a helmet, a
lock and a basket for slightly less than fifty American dollars. Now Im mobile in my new town
of Ubud, or at least as mobile as I can safely feel on these roads, which are narrow and winding
and badly maintained and crowded with motorcycles, trucks and tourist buses.
In the afternoon, I ride my bike down into Ketuts village, to hang out with my medicine
man for our first day of . . . whatever it is were going to be doing together. Im not sure, to be
honest. English lessons? Meditation lessons? Good old-fashioned porch-sitting? I dont know
what Ketut has in mind for me, but Im just happy to be invited into his life.
Hes got guests when I arrive. Its a small family of rural Balinese who have brought their
one-year-old daughter to Ketut for help. The poor little baby is teething and has been crying
for several nights. Dad is a handsome young man in a sarong; he has the muscular calves of
a Soviet war heros statue. Mom is pretty and shy, looking at me from way below her timidly
lowered eyelids. They have brought a tiny offering to Ketut for his services2,000 rupiah,
which is about 25 cents, placed in a handmade basket of palm fronds, slightly bigger than a
hotel bars ashtray. There is one flower blossom in the basket, along with the money and a
few grains of rice. (Their poverty puts them in stark opposition to the richer family from the
capital city of Denpesar who will come to see Ketut later in the afternoon, the mother balancing
on her head a three-tiered basket filled with fruit and flowers and a roasted ducka
headgear so magnificent and impressive that Carmen Miranda would have bowed down in
humility before it.)
Ketut is relaxed and gracious with his company. He listens to the parents explain their
babys troubles. Then he digs through a small trunk on his porch and pulls out an ancient
ledger filled with tiny writing in Balinese Sanskrit. He consults this book like a scholar, looking
for some combination of words that will suit him, talking and laughing with the parents the
whole time. Then he takes a blank page from a notebook with a picture of Kermit the Frog on
it, and writes what he tells me is a prescription for the little girl. The child is being tormented
by a minor demon, he diagnoses, in addition to the physical discomforts of teething. For the
teething, he advises the parents to simply rub the babys gums with pressed red onion juice.
To appease the demon, they must make an offering of a small killed chicken and a small pig,
along with a little bit of cake, mixed with special herbs which their grandmother should definitely
have access to from her own medicine garden. (This food wont be wasted; after the offering
ceremony, Balinese families are always allowed to eat their own donations to the gods,
since the offering is more metaphysical than literal. The way the Balinese see it, God takes
what belongs to Godthe gesturewhile man takes what belongs to manthe food itself.)
After writing the prescription, Ketut turns his back to us, fills a bowl with water, and keens
a spectacular, quietly chilling mantra above it. Then Ketut blesses the baby with the water he
has just infused with sacred power. Even at one year old, the child already knows how to receive
a holy blessing in the traditional Balinese manner. Her mother holds her, and the baby
puts out her little plummy paws to receive the water, sips it once, sips it again and splashes
the rest on top of her heada perfectly executed ritual. She could not be less frightened of
this toothless old man who is chanting at her. Then Ketut takes the rest of the holy water and
pours it into a small plastic sandwich bag, ties the bag at the top and gives it to the family to
use later. The mother carries this plastic bag of water away with her as she leaves; it looks
like she has just won a goldfish at the state fair, only she forgot to take the goldfish with her.
Ketut Liyer has given this family about forty minutes of his undivided attention, for the fee
of about twenty-five cents. If they hadnt any money at all, he would have done the same; this
is his duty as a healer. He may turn nobody away, or the gods will remove his talent for healing.
Ketut gets about ten visitors a day like this, Balinese who need his help or advice on
some holy or medical matter. On highly auspicious days, when everyone wants a special
blessing, he might have over one hundred visitors.
Dont you get tired?
But this is my profession, he tells me. This is my hobbymedicine man.
A few more patients come throughout the afternoon, but Ketut and I get some time alone
together on the porch, too. Im so comfortable with this medicine man, as relaxed as with my
own grandfather. He gives me my first lesson in Balinese meditation. He tells me that there
are many ways to find God but most are too complicated for Westerners, so he will teach me
an easy meditation. Which goes, essentially, like this: sit in silence and smile. I love it. Hes
laughing even as hes teaching it to me. Sit and smile. Perfect.
You study Yoga in India, Liss? he asks.
Yes, Ketut.
You can do Yoga, he says, but Yoga too hard. Here, he contorts himself in a cramped
lotus position and squinches up his face in a comical and constipated-looking effort. Then he
breaks free and laughs, asking, Why they always look so serious in Yoga? You make serious
face like this, you scare away good energy. To meditate, only you must smile. Smile with
face, smile with mind, and good energy will come to you and clean away dirty energy. Even
smile in your liver. Practice tonight at hotel. Not to hurry, not to try too hard. Too serious, you
make you sick. You can calling the good energy with a smile. All finish for today. See you
later, alligator. Come back tomorrow. I am very happy to see you, Liss. Let your conscience
be your guide. If you have Western friends come to visit Bali, bring them to me for palmreading.
I am very empty in my bank since the bomb.
Eat, Pray, Love

 78


 Here is Ketut Liyers life story pretty much as he tells it:
 It is nine generations that my family is a medicine man. My father, my grandfather, my
great-grandfather, all of them is a medicine man. They all want me to be medicine man because
they see I have light. They see I have beautiful and I have intelligent. But I do not want
to be medicine man. Too much study! Too much information! And I dont believe in medicine
man! I want to be painter! I want to be artist! I have good talent with this.
When I was still young man, I meet American man, very rich, maybe even New York City
person like you. He like my painting. He wants to buy big painting from me, maybe one meter
big, for lot of money. Enough money to be rich. So I start to painting this picture for him. Every
day I painting, painting, painting. Even in night I painting. In this day, long time ago, no electric
lightbulb like today, so I have lamp. Oil lamp, you understand? Pump lamp, have to pump it to
make oil come. And I always make painting every night with oil lamp.
One night, oil lamp is dark, so I pumping, pumping, pumping and it explode! Makes my
arm on fire! I go to hospital for one month with burned arm, it make infection. Infection goes
all the way to my heart. The doctor say I must to go to Singapore for cut off my arm, for amputation.
This is not my cup of tea. But doctor says I must go to Singapore, have operation to cut
arm off. I tell doctorfirst I go home to my village.
That night in village, I got dream. Father, grandfather, great-grandfatherall they come in
my dream to my house together and tell me how to heal my burned arm. They tell me make
juice from saffron and sandalwood. Put this juice on burn. Then make powder from saffron
and sandalwood. Rub this powder on burn. They tell me I must do this, then I not lose my
arm. So real this dream, like they in house with me, all of they together.
I wake up. I dont know what to do, because sometimes dreams are just joking, you understand?
But I make back to my home and I put this saffron and sandalwood juice on my
arm. And then I put this saffron and sandalwood powder on my arm. My arm very infected,
very ache, made big, very swell. But after juice and powder, become very cool. Became very
cold. Start to feel better. In ten days, my arm is good. All heal.
For that, I start to believe. Now I have dream again, with father, grandfather, greatgrandfather.
They tell me now I must be medicine man. My soul, I must give it to God. For do
this, I must make fast for six days, understand? No food, no water. No drink. No breakfast.
Not easy. I so thirsty from fast, I go to rice fields in morning, before sun. I sit in rice field with
mouth open and take water from air. How you call this, the water in air in rice field in morning?
Dew? Yes. Dew. Only this dew I eat for six days. No other food, only this dew. On number
five day, I get unconscious. I see all yellow color everywhere. No, not yellow colorGOLD. I
see gold color everywhere, even inside me. Very happy. I understand now. This gold color is
God, also inside me. Same thing that is God is same thing inside me. Same-same.
So now I must be medicine man. Now I have to learn medical books from greatgrandfather.
These books not made on paper, made on palm leaves. Called lontars. This is
Balinese medical encyclopedia. I must learn all different plants on Bali. Not easy. One by one,
I learn everything. I learn to take care of people with many problem. One problem is when
someone is sick from physical. I help this physical sick with herbs. Other problem is when
family is sick, when family always fighting. I help this with harmony, with special magic drawing,
also with talking for helping. Put magic drawing in house, no more fighting. Sometimes
people sick in love, not find right match. For Balinese and Western, too, always a lot of trouble
with love, difficult to find right match. I fix love problem with mantra and with magic drawing,
bring love to you. Also, I learn black magic, to help people if bad black magic spell on them.
My magic drawing, you put in your house, bring you good energy.
I still like to be artist, I like make painting when I have time, sell to gallery. My painting, always
the same paintingwhen Bali was paradise, maybe one thousand years ago. Painting
of jungle, animals, women withwhat is word? Breast. Women with breast. Difficult for me to
find time to make painting because of medicine man, but I must be medicine man. It is my
profession. It is my hobby. Must help people or God is angry with me. Must deliver baby
sometimes, do ceremony for dead man, or do ceremony for tooth-filing or wedding. Sometimes
I wake up, three in morning, make painting by electric lightbulbonly time I can make
painting for me. I like alone this time of day, good for making painting.
I do true magic, not joking. Always I tell true, even if bad news. I must do good character
always in my life, or I will be in hell. I speak Balinese, Indonesian, little bit Japanese, little bit
English, little bit Dutch. During war, many Japanese here. Not so bad for meI read palms
for Japanese, make friendly. Before war, many Dutch here. Now many Western here, all
speak English. My Dutch ishow you say? What that word you teach me yesterday? Rusty?
Yesrusty. My Dutch is rusty. Ha!
I am in fourth caste in Bali, in very low caste like farmer. But I see many people in first
caste not so intelligent as me. My name is Ketut Liyer. Liyer is name my grandfather gave me
when I was little boy. It means bright light. This is me.
Eat, Pray, Love

 79


 I am so free here in Bali, its almost ridiculous. The only thing I have to do every day is visit
Ketut Liyer for a few hours in the afternoon, which is far short of a chore. The rest of the day
gets taken care of in various nonchalant manners. I meditate for an hour every morning using
the Yogic techniques my Guru taught me, and then I meditate for an hour every evening with
the practices Ketut has taught me (sit still and smile). In between, I walk around and ride my
bike and sometimes talk to people and eat lunch. I found a quiet little lending library in this
town, got myself a library card, and now great, luscious portions of my life are spent reading
in the garden. After the intensity of life in the Ashram, and even after the decadent business
of zooming all over Italy and eating everything in sight, this is such a new and radically peaceful
episode of my life. I have so much free time, you could measure it in metric tons.
Whenever I leave the hotel, Mario and the other staff members at the front desk ask me
where Im going, and every time I return, they ask me where I have been. I can almost imagine
that they keep tiny maps in the desk drawer of all their loved ones, with markings indicating
where everyone is at every given moment, just to make sure the entire beehive is accounted
for at all times.
In the evenings I spin my bicycle high up into the hills and across the acres of rice terraces
north of Ubud, with views so splendid and green. I can see the pink clouds reflected in the
standing water of the rice paddies, like there are two skiesone up in heaven for the gods,
and one down here in the muddy wet, just for us mortals. The other day, I rode up to the heron
sanctuary, with its grudging welcome sign (OK, you can see herons here), but there were
no herons that day, just ducks, so I watched the ducks for a while, then rode on into the next
village. Along the way I passed men and women and children and chickens and dogs who all,
in their own way, were busy working, but none so busy that they couldnt stop to greet me.
A few nights ago, on the top of one lovely rise of forest I saw a sign: Artists House for
Rent, with Kitchen. Because the universe is generous, three days later I am living there.
Mario helped me move in, and all his friends at the hotel gave me a tearful farewell.
My new house is on a quiet road, surrounded in all directions by rice fields. Its a little cottagelike
place inside ivy-covered walls. Its owned by an Englishwoman, but she is in London
for the summer, so I slide into her home, replacing her in this miraculous space. There is a
bright red kitchen here, a pond full of goldfish, a marble terrace, an outdoor shower tiled in
shiny mosaics; while I shampoo I can watch the herons nesting in the palm trees. Little secret
paths lead through a truly enchanting garden. The place comes with a gardener, so all I have
to do is look at the flowers. I dont know what any of these extraordinary equatorial flowers are
called, so I make up names for them. And why not? Its my Eden, is it not? Soon Ive given all
the plants around here new monikersdaffodil tree, cabbage-palm, prom-dress weed, spiral
show-off, tip-toe blossom, melancholy-vine and a spectacular pink orchid I have christened
Babys First Handshake. The unnecessary and superfluous volume of pure beauty around
here is not to be believed. I can pick papayas and bananas right off the trees outside my bedroom
window. Theres a cat who lives here who is enormously affectionate to me for the half
hour every day before I feed him, then moans crazily the rest of the time like hes having Vietnam
War flashbacks. Oddly, I dont mind this. I dont mind anything these days. I cant imagine
or remember discontent.
The sound universe is also spectacular around here. In the evenings theres a cricket orchestra
with frogs providing the bass line. In the dead of night the dogs howl about how misunderstood
they are. Before dawn the roosters for miles around announce how freaking cool
it is to be roosters.(We are ROOSTERS! they holler. We are the only ones who get to be
ROOSTERS!) Every morning around sunrise there is a tropical birdsong competition, and its
always a ten-way tie for the championship. When the sun comes out the place quiets down
and the butterflies get to work. The whole house is covered with vines; I feel like any day it will
disappear into the foliage completely and I will disappear with it and become a jungle flower
myself. The rent is less than what I used to pay in New York City for taxi fare every month.
The word paradise, by the way, which comes to us from the Persian, means literally a
walled garden.
Eat, Pray, Love

 80


 That said, I must be honest here and relay that it takes me only three afternoons of research
in the local library to realize that all my original ideas about Balinese paradise were a
bit misguided. Id been telling people since I first visited Bali two years ago that this small island
was the worlds only true utopia, a place that has known only peace and harmony and
balance for all time. A perfect Eden with no history of violence or bloodshed ever. Im not sure
where I got this grand idea, but I endorsed it with full confidence.
Even the policemen wear flowers in their hair, I would say, as if that proved it.
In reality, though, it turns out Bali has had exactly as bloody and violent and oppressive a
history as anywhere else on earth where human beings have ever lived. When the Javanese
kings first immigrated here in the sixteenth century, they essentially established a feudal
colony, with a strict caste system whichlike all self-respecting caste systemstended not to
trouble itself with consideration for those at the bottom. The economy of early Bali was fueled
by a lucrative slave trade (which not only preceded European participation in the international
slave traffic by several centuries, but also outlived Europes trafficking of human lives for a
good long while). Internally, the island was constantly at war as rival kings staged attacks
(complete with mass rape and murder) on their neighbors. Until the late nineteenth century,
the Balinese had a reputation amongst traders and sailors for being vicious fighters. (The
word amok, as in running amok, is a Balinese word, describing a battle technique of suddenly
going insanely wild against ones enemies in suicidal and bloody hand-to-hand combat;
the Europeans were frankly terrified by this practice.) With a well-disciplined army of 30,000,
the Balinese defeated their Dutch invaders in 1848, again in 1849 and once more, for good
measure, in 1850. They collapsed under Dutch rule only when the rival kings of Bali broke
ranks and betrayed each other in bids for power, aligning with the enemy for the promise of
good business deals later. So to gauze this islands history today in a dream of paradise is a
bit insulting to reality; its not like these people have spent the last millennium just sitting
around smiling and singing happy songs.
But in the 1920s and 1930s, when an elite class of Western travelers discovered Bali, all
this bloodiness was ignored as the newcomers agreed that this was truly The Island of the
Gods, where everyone is an artist and where humanity lives in an unspoiled state of bliss.
Its been a lingering idea, this dream; most visitors to Bali (myself on my first trip included) still
endorse it. I was furious at God that I was not born Balinese, said the German photographer
George Krauser after visiting Bali in the 1930s. Lured by reports of otherworldly beauty and
serenity, some really A-list tourists started visiting the islandartists like Walter Spies, writers
like Nol Coward, dancers like Claire Holt, actors like Charlie Chaplin, scholars like Margaret
Mead (who, despite all the naked breasts, wisely called Balinese civilization on what it truly
was, a society as prim as Victorian England: Not an ounce of free libido in the whole culture.)
The party ended in the 1940s when the world went to war. The Japanese invaded Indonesia,
and the blissful expatriates in their Balinese gardens with their pretty houseboys were
forced to flee. In the struggle for Indonesian independence which followed the war, Bali became
just as divided and violent as the rest of the archipelago, and by the 1950s (reports a
study called Bali: Paradise Invented) if a Westerner dared visit Bali at all, he might have been
wise to sleep with a gun under his pillow. In the 1960s, the struggle for power turned all of Indonesia
into a battlefield between Nationalists and Communists. After a coup attempt in
Jakarta in 1965, Nationalist soldiers were sent to Bali with the names of every suspected
Communist on the island. Over the course of about a week, aided by the local police and village
authorities at every step, the Nationalist forces steadily murdered their way through
every township. Something like 100,000 corpses choked the beautiful rivers of Bali when the
killing spree was over.
The revival of the dream of a fabled Eden came in the late 1960s, when the Indonesian
government decided to reinvent Bali for the international tourist market as The Island of the
Gods, launching a massively successful marketing campaign. The tourists who were lured
back to Bali were a fairly high-minded crowd (this was not Fort Lauderdale, after all), and their
attention was guided toward the artistic and religious beauty inherent in the Balinese culture.
Darker elements of history were overlooked. And have remained overlooked since.
Reading about all this during my afternoons in the local library leaves me somewhat confused.
Waitwhy did I come to Bali again? To search for the balance between worldly pleasure
and spiritual devotion, right? Is this, indeed, the right setting for such a search? Do the
Balinese truly inhabit that peaceful balance, more than anyone else in the world? I mean, they
look balanced, what with all the dancing and praying and feasting and beauty and smiling, but
I dont know whats actually going on under there. The policemen really do wear flowers
tucked behind their ears, but theres corruption all over the place in Bali, just like in the rest of
Indonesia (as I found out firsthand the other day when I passed a uniformed man a few hundred
bucks of under-the-table cash to illegally extend my visa so I could stay in Bali for four
months, after all). The Balinese quite literally live off their image of being the worlds most
peaceful and devotional and artistically expressive people, but how much of that is intrinsic
and how much of that is economically calculated? And how much can an outsider like me
ever learn of the hidden stresses that might loiter behind those shining faces? Its the same
here as anywhere elseyou look at the picture too closely and all the firm lines start to melt
away into an indistinct mass of blurry brushstrokes and blended pixels.
For now, all I can say for certain is that I love the house I have rented and that the people
in Bali have been gracious to me without exception. I find their art and ceremonies to be
beautiful and restorative; they seem to think so, as well. Thats my empirical experience of a
place that is probably far more complex than I will ever understand. But whatever the
Balinese need to do in order to hold their own balance (and make a living) is entirely up to
them. What Im here to do is work on my own equilibrium, and this still feels, at least for now,
like a nourishing climate in which to do that.
Eat, Pray, Love

 81


 I dont know how old my medicine man is. Ive asked him, but hes not certain. I seem to remember,
when I was here two years ago, the translator saying that he was eighty. But Mario
asked him the other day how old he was and Ketut said, Maybe sixty-five, not sure. When I
asked him what year he was born, he said he didnt remember being born. I know he was an
adult when the Japanese were occupying Bali during World War II, which could make him
about eighty now. But when he told me the story about burning his arm as a young man, and I
asked him what year that had happened, he said, I dont know. Maybe 1920? So if he was
around twenty years old in 1920, then that makes him what now? Maybe a hundred and five?
So we can estimate that hes somewhere between sixty and a hundred and five years old.
Ive also noticed that his estimation of his age changes by the day, based on how he feels.
When hes really tired, hell sigh and say, Maybe eighty-five today, but when hes feeling
more upbeat hell say, I think Im sixty today. Perhaps this is as good a way of estimating
age as anyhow old do you feel? What else matters, really? Still, Im always trying to figure it
out. One afternoon I got really simple, and just said, Ketutwhen is your birthday?
Thursday, he said.
This Thursday?
No. Not this Thursday. A Thursday.
This is a good start . . . but is there no more information than that? A Thursday in what
month? In what year? No telling. Anyway, the day of the week that you were born is more important
in Bali than the year, which is why, even though Ketut doesnt know how old he is, he
was able to tell me that the patron god of children born on Thursdays is Shiva the Destroyer,
and that the day has two guiding animal spiritsthe lion and the tiger. The official tree of children
born on Thursday is the banyan. The official bird is the peacock. A person born on
Thursday is always talking first, interrupting everyone else, can be a little aggressive, tends to
be handsome (a playboy or playgirl, in Ketuts words) but has a decent overall character,
with an excellent memory and a desire to help other people.
When his Balinese patients come to Ketut with serious health or economic or relationship
problems, he always asks on which day of the week they were born, in order to concoct the
correct prayers and medicines to help them. Because sometimes, Ketut says, people are
sick in the birthday, and they need a little astrological adjustment in order to set them in balance
again. A local family brought their youngest son to see Ketut the other day. The child
was maybe four years old. I asked what the problem was and Ketut translated that the family
was concerned about problems with very aggressive this boy. This boy not take orders. Bad
behave. Not pay attention. Everyone in house tired from the boy. Also, sometimes this boy
too dizzy.
Ketut asked the parents if he could hold the child for a moment. They put their son in Ketuts
lap and the boy leaned back against the old medicine mans chest, relaxed and unafraid.
Ketut held him tenderly, placed a palm on the childs forehead, shut his eyes. He then placed
a palm on the boys belly, shut his eyes again. He was smiling and speaking gently to the
child the whole time. The examination was quickly over. Ketut handed the boy back to his parents,
and the people left soon after with a prescription and some holy water. Ketut told me
hed asked the parents about the circumstances of the boys birth and had discovered the
child had been born under a bad star and on a Saturdaya day of birth which contains elements
of potentially bad spirits, like crow spirit, owl spirit, rooster spirit (this is what makes the
child a fighter) and puppet spirit (this is whats causing his dizziness). But it was not all bad
news. Being born on Saturday, the boys body also contained rainbow spirit and butterfly spirit,
and these could be strengthened. A series of offerings would have to be made and the
child would be brought into balance once more.
Why did you hold your hand on the boys forehead and stomach? I asked. Were you
checking for fever?
I was check his brain, Ketut said. To see if he had evil spirits in his mind.
What kind of evil spirits?
Liss, he said. I am Balinese. I believe from black magic. I believe evil spirits come out
rivers and hurt people.
Did the boy have evil spirits?
No. He is only sick in his birthday. His family will make sacrifice. This will be OK. And you,
Liss? You are practice Balinese meditation every night? Keep mind and heart clean?
Every night, I promised.
You learn to smile even in your liver?
Even in my liver, Ketut. Big smile in my liver.
Good. This smile will make you beautiful woman. This will give you power of to be very
pretty. You can use this powerpretty power!to get what you want in life.
Pretty power! I repeat the phrase, loving it. Like a meditating Barbie. I want pretty
power!
You are still practice Indian meditation, too?
Every morning.
Good. Dont forget your Yoga. Beneficial to you. Good for you to keep practice both ways
of meditationIndian and Balinese. Both different, but good in equal way. Same-same. I think
about religion, most of it is same-same.
Not everybody thinks so, Ketut. Some people like to argue about God.
Not necessary, he said. I have good idea, for if you meet some person from different religion
and he want to make argument about God. My idea is, you listen to everything this man
say about God. Never argue about God with him. Best thing to say is, I agree with you. Then
you go home, pray what you want. This is my idea for people to have peace about religion.
Ketut keeps his chin lifted all the time, Ive noticed, his head held a little bit back, sort of
quizzical and elegant at the same time. Like a curious old king, he looks at the whole world
from above his nose. His skin is lustrous, golden brown. Hes almost totally bald, but makes
up for it with exceptionally long and feathery eyebrows which look eager to take flight. Except
for his missing teeth and his burn-scarred right arm, he seems in perfect health. He told me
that he was a dancer in his youth, for the temple ceremonies, and that he was beautiful back
then. I believe it. He eats only one meal a daya typically simple Balinese dish of rice mixed
with either duck or fish. He likes to drink one cup of coffee with sugar every day, mostly just to
celebrate the fact that he can afford coffee and sugar. You, too, could easily live to a hundred
and five on this diet. He keeps his body strong, he says, by meditating every night before
sleep and by pulling the healthy energy of the universe into his core. He says that the human
body is made of nothing more or less than the five elements of all creationwater (apa), fire
(tejo), wind (bayu), sky (akasa) and earth (pritiwi)and all you have to do is concentrate on
this reality during meditation and you will receive energy from all of these sources and you will
stay strong. Demonstrating his occasionally very accurate ear for English idiom, he said, The
microcosm becomes the macrocosm. Youmicrocosmwill become same as universemacrocosm.

He was so busy today, crowded with Balinese patients who were stacked up all over his
courtyard like cargo crates, all of them with babies or offerings in their laps. He had farmers
and businessmen there, fathers and grandmothers. There were parents with babies who werent
keeping food down, and old men haunted by black magic curses. There were young men
tossed by aggression and lust, and young women looking for love matches while suffering
children complained about their rashes. Everyone out of balance; everyone needing equilibrium
restored.
The mood of the courtyard of Ketuts home is always one of total patience, though. Sometimes
people must wait for three hours before Ketut gets a chance to take care of them, but
they never so much as tap their feet or roll their eyes in exasperation. Extraordinary, too, is
the way the children wait, leaning up against their beautiful mothers, playing with their own
fingers to pass the time. Im always amused later when it turns out that these same tranquil
children have been brought over to see Ketut because the mother and father have decided
that the child is too naughty and needs a cure. That little girl? That little three-year-old girl
who was sitting silently in the hot sun for four straight hours, without complaint or snack or
toy? Shes naughty? I wish I could say, Peopleyou want to see naughty, Ill take you to
America, show you some kids thatll have you believing in Ritalin. But theres just a different
standard here for good behavior in children.
Ketut treated all the patients obligingly, one after another, seemingly unconcerned by the
passage of time, giving all exactly the attention they needed regardless of who was waiting to
be seen next. He was so busy he didnt even get his one meal at lunchtime, but stayed glued
to his porch, obliged by his respect for God and his ancestors to sit there for hours on end,
healing everyone. By evening, his eyes looked as tired as the eyes of a Civil War field surgeon.
His last patient of the day had been a deeply troubled middle-aged Balinese man complaining
that he had not slept well in weeks; he was being haunted, he said, by a nightmare of
drowning in two rivers at the same time.
Until this evening, I still wasnt sure what my role was in Ketut Liyers life. Every day Ive
been asking him if hes really sure he wants me around, and he keeps insisting that I must
come and spend time with him. I feel guilty taking up so much of his day, but he always
seems disappointed when I leave at the end of the afternoon. Im not teaching him any English,
not really. Whatever English he already learned however many decades ago has been
cemented into his mind by now and there isnt much space for correction or new vocabulary.
Its all I can do to get him to say, Nice to see you, when I arrive, instead of Nice to meet
you.
Tonight, when his last patient had left and Ketut was exhausted, looking ancient from the
weariness of service, I asked him whether I should go now and let him have some privacy,
and he replied, I always have time for you. Then he asked me to tell him some stories about
India, about America, about Italy, about my family. Thats when I realized that I am not Ketut
Liyers English teacher, nor am I exactly his theological student, but I am the merest and
simplest of pleasures for this old medicine manI am his company. Im somebody he can talk
to because he enjoys hearing about the world and he hasnt had much of a chance to see it.
In our hours together on this porch, Ketut has asked me questions about everything from
how much cars cost in Mexico to what causes AIDS. (I did my best with both topics, though I
believe there are experts who could have answered with more substance.) Ketut has never
been off the island of Bali in his life. He has spent very little time, actually, off this porch. He
once went on a pilgrimage to Mount Agung, the biggest and most spiritually important volcano
on Bali, but he said the energy was so powerful there he could scarcely meditate for fear he
might be consumed by sacred fire. He goes to the temples for the big important ceremonies
and he is invited to his neighbors homes to perform weddings or coming-of-age rituals, but
most of the time he can be found right here, cross-legged upon this bamboo mat, surrounded
by his great-grandfathers palm-leaf medical encyclopedias, taking care of people, mollifying
demons and occasionally treating himself to a cup of coffee with sugar.
I had a dream from you last night, he told me today. I had a dream you are riding your
bicycle anywhere.
Because he paused, I suggested a grammatical correction. Do you mean, you had a
dream that I was riding my bicycle everywhere?
Yes! I dream last night you are riding your bicycle anywhere and everywhere. You are so
happy in my dream! All over world, you are riding your bicycle. And I following you!
Maybe he wishes he could . . .
Maybe you can come see me someday in America, Ketut, I said.
Cant, Liss. He shook his head, cheerfully resigned to his destiny. Dont have enough
teeth to travel on airplane.
Eat, Pray, Love

 82


 As for Ketuts wife, it takes me a while to align myself with her. Nyomo, as he calls her, is
big and plump with a stiff-hip limp and teeth stained red by chewing on betel nut tobacco. Her
toes are painfully crooked from arthritis. She has a shrewd eye. She was scary to me from the
first sight. Shes got that fierce old lady vibe you see sometimes in Italian widows and righteous
black churchgoing mamas. She looks like shed whup your hide for the slightest of misdemeanors.
She was blatantly suspicious of me at firstWho is this flamingo traipsing
through my house every day? She would stare at me from inside the sooty shadows of her
kitchen, unconvinced as to my right to exist. I would smile at her and shed just keep staring,
deciding whether she should chase me out with a broomstick or not.
But then something changed. It was after the whole photocopy incident.
Ketut Liyer has all these piles of old, lined notebooks and ledgers, filled with tiny little
handwriting, of ancient Balinese-Sanskrit mysteries about healing. He copied these notes into
these notebooks way back in the 1940s or 1950s, sometime after his grandfather died, so he
would have all the medical information recorded. This stuff is beyond invaluable. There are
volumes of data about rare trees and leaves and plants and all their medicinal properties.
Hes got some sixty pages of diagrams about palm-reading, and more notebooks full of astrological
data, mantras, spells and cures. The only thing is, these notebooks had been through
decades of mildew and mice and theyre shredded almost to bits. Yellow and crumbling and
musty, they look like disintegrating piles of autumn leaves. Every time he turns a page, he rips
the page.
Ketut, I said to him last week, holding up one of his battered notebooks, Im not a doctor
like you are, but I think this book is dying.
He laughed. You think is dying?
Sir, I said gravely, here is my professional opinionif this book does not get some help
soon, it will be dead within the next six months.
Then I asked if I could take the notebook into town with me and photocopy it before it died.
I had to explain what photocopying was, and promise that I would only keep the notebook for
twenty-four hours and that I would do it no harm. Finally, he agreed to let me take it off the
porch property with my most passionate assurances that I would be careful with his grandfathers
wisdom. I rode into town to the shop with the Internet computers and photocopiers
and I gingerly duplicated every page, then had the new, clean photocopies bound in a nice
plastic folder. I brought the old and the new versions of the book back the next day before
noon. Ketut was astonished and delighted, so happy because hes had that notebook, he
said, for fifty years. Which might literally mean fifty years, or might just mean a really long
time.
I asked if I could copy the rest of his notebooks, to keep that information safe, too. He held
out another limp, broken, shredded, gasping document filled with Balinese Sanskrit and complicated
sketches.
Another patient! he said.
Let me heal it! I replied.
This was another grand success. By the end of the week, Id photocopied several of the
old manuscripts. Every day, Ketut called his wife over and showed her the new copies and he
was overjoyed. Her facial expression didnt change at all, but she studied the evidence thoroughly.
And the next Monday when I came to visit, Nyomo brought me hot coffee, served in a jelly
jar. I watched her carry the drink across the courtyard on a china saucer, limping slowly on
the long journey from her kitchen to Ketuts porch. I assumed the coffee was intended for Ketut,
but, nohed already had his coffee. This was for me. Shed prepared it for me. I tried to
thank her but she looked annoyed at my thanks, kind of swatted me away the way she swats
away the rooster who always tries to stand on her outdoor kitchen table when shes preparing
lunch. But the next day she brought me a glass of coffee and a bowl of sugar on the side. And
the next day it was a glass of coffee, a bowl of sugar and a cold boiled potato. Every day that
week, she added a new treat. This was starting to feel like that childhood car trip alphabet-memory
game: Im going to Grandmas house, and Im bringing an apple . . . Im going to
Grandmas house and Im bringing an apple and a balloon . . . Im going to Grandmas house
and Im bringing an apple, a balloon, a cup of coffee in a jelly glass, a bowl of sugar and a
cold potato . . .
Then, yesterday, I was standing in the courtyard, saying my good-byes to Ketut, and
Nyomo came shuffling past with her broom, sweeping and pretending not to be paying attention
to everything that happens in her empire. I had my hands clasped behind my back as I
was standing there, and she came up behind me and took one of my hands in hers. She
fumbled through my hand like she was trying to untumble the combination on a lock and she
found my index finger. Then she wrapped her whole big, hard fist around that finger and gave
me this deep, long squeeze. I could feel her love pulsing through her power grip, right up into
my arm and all the way down into my guts. Then she dropped my hand and limped away arthritically,
saying not a single word, continuing her sweeping as though nothing had happened.
While I stood there quietly drowning in two rivers of happiness at the same time.
Eat, Pray, Love

 83


 I have a new friend. His name is Yudhi, which is pronounced You-Day. Hes Indonesian,
originally from Java. I got to know him because he rented my house to me; hes working for
the Englishwoman who owns the place, looking after her property while shes away in London
for the summer. Yudhi is twenty-seven years old and stocky in build and talks kind of like a
southern California surfer. He calls me man and dude all the time. Hes got a smile that
could stop crime, and hes got a long, complicated life story for somebody so young.
He was born in Jakarta; his mother was a housewife, his father an Indonesian fan of Elvis
who owned a small air-conditioning and refrigeration business. The family was Christianan
oddity in this part of the world, and Yudhi tells entertaining stories about being mocked by the
neighborhood Muslim kids for such shortcomings as You eat pork! and You love Jesus!
Yudhi wasnt bothered by the teasing; Yudhi, by nature, isnt bothered by much. His mom,
however, didnt like him hanging around with the Muslim kids, mostly on account of the fact
that they were always barefoot, which Yudhi also liked to be, but she thought it was unhygienic,
so she gave her son a choicehe could either wear shoes and play outside, or he could
stay barefoot and remain indoors. Yudhi doesnt like wearing shoes, so he spent a big chunk
of his childhood and adolescence life in his bedroom, and thats where he learned how to play
the guitar. Barefoot.
The guy has a musical ear like maybe nobody Ive ever met. Hes beautiful with the guitar,
never had lessons but understands melody and harmony like they were the kid sisters he
grew up with. He makes these East-West blends of music that combine classical Indonesian
lullabies with reggae groove and early-days Stevie Wonder funkits hard to explain, but he
should be famous. I never knew anybody who heard Yudhis music who didnt think he should
be famous.
Heres what he always wanted to do most of alllive in America and work in show business.
The worlds shared dream. So when Yudhi was still a Javanese teenager, he somehow
talked himself into a job (speaking hardly any English yet) on a Carnival Cruise Lines ship,
thereby casting himself out of his narrow Jakarta environs and into the big, blue world. The
job Yudhi got on the cruise ship was one of those insane jobs for industrious immig-
rantsliving belowdecks, working twelve hours a day, one day off a month, cleaning. His fellow
workers were Filipinos and Indonesians. The Indonesians and the Filipinos slept and ate
in separate quarters of the boat, never mingling (Muslims vs. Christians, dont you know), but
Yudhi, in typical fashion, befriended everybody and became a kind of emissary between the
two groups of Asian laborers. He saw more similarities than differences between these maids
and custodians and dishwashers, all of whom were working bottomless hours in order to send
a hundred dollars or so a month back to their families at home.
The first time the cruise ship sailed into New York Harbor, Yudhi stayed up all night,
perched on the highest deck, watching the city skyline appear over the horizon, heart hammering
with excitement. Hours later, he got off the ship in New York and hailed a yellow cab,
just like in the movies. When the recent African immigrant driving the taxi asked where hed
like to go, Yudhi said, Anywhere, manjust drive me around. I want to see everything. A
few months later the ship came to New York City again, and this time Yudhi disembarked for
good. His contract was up with the cruise line and he wanted to live in America now.
He ended up in suburban New Jersey, of all places, living for a while with an Indonesian
man hed met on the ship. He got a job in a sandwich shop at the mallagain, ten-to-twelvehour
days of immigrant-style labor, this time working with Mexicans, not Filipinos. He learned
better Spanish those first few months than English. In his rare moments of free time, Yudhi
would ride the bus into Manhattan and just wander the streets, still so speechlessly infatuated
with the citya town he describes today as the place which is the most full of love in the entire
world. Somehow (againthat smile) he met up in New York City with a crowd of young
musicians from all over the world and he took to playing guitar with them, jamming all night
with talented kids from Jamaica, Africa, France, Japan . . . And at one of those gigs, he met
Anna pretty blonde from Connecticut who played bass. They fell in love. They got married.
They found an apartment in Brooklyn and they were surrounded by groovy friends who all
went on road trips together down to the Florida Keys. Life was just unbelievably happy. His
English was quickly impeccable. He was thinking about going to college.
On September 11, Yudhi watched the towers fall from his rooftop in Brooklyn. Like everyone
else he was paralyzed with grief at what had happenedhow could somebody inflict
such an appalling atrocity on the city that is the most full of love of anywhere in the world? I
dont know how much attention Yudhi was paying when the U.S. Congress subsequently
passed the Patriot Act in response to the terrorist threatlegislation which included draconian
new immigration laws, many of which were directed against Islamic nations such as Indonesia.
One of these provisions demanded that all Indonesian citizens living in America register
with the Department of Homeland Security. The telephones started ringing as Yudhi and his
young Indonesian immigrant friends tried to figure out what to domany of them had over-
stayed their visas and were afraid that registering would get them deported. On the other
hand, they were afraid to not register, thereby behaving like criminals. Presumably the fundamentalist
Islamic terrorists roaming around America ignored this registration law, but Yudhi
decided that he did want to register. He was married to an American and he wanted to update
his immigration status and become a legal citizen. He didnt want to live in hiding.
He and Ann consulted all kinds of lawyers, but nobody knew how to advise them. Before
9/11 there would have been no problemsYudhi, now married, could just go to the immigration
office, update his visa situation and begin the process of gaining citizenship. But now?
Who knew? The laws havent been tested yet, said the immigration lawyers. The laws will
be tested on you. So Yudhi and his wife had a meeting with a nice immigration official and
shared their story. The couple were told that Yudhi was to come back later that same afternoon,
for a second interview. They should have been wary then; Yudhi was strictly instructed
to return without his wife, without a lawyer, and carrying nothing in his pockets. Hoping for
the best, he did return alone and empty-handed to the second interviewand thats when
they arrested him.
They took him to a detention center in Elizabeth, New Jersey, where he stayed for weeks
amongst a vast crowd of immigrants, all of whom had recently been arrested under the
Homeland Security Act, many of whom had been living and working in America for years,
most of whom didnt speak English. Some had been unable to contact their families upon their
arrests. They were invisible in the detention center; nobody knew they existed anymore. It
took a near-hysterical Ann days to find out where her husband had been taken. What Yudhi
remembers most about the detention center was the dozen coal-black, thin and terrified Nigerian
men who had been found on a freight ship inside a steel shipping crate; they had been
hiding in that container at the bottom of that ship for almost a month before they were discovered,
trying to get to Americaor anywhere. They had no idea now where they were.
Their eyes were so wide, Yudhi said, it looked like they were still being blinded with spotlights.
After a period of detention, the U.S. government sent my Christian friend Yudhinow an
Islamic terrorist suspect, apparentlyback to Indonesia. This was last year. I dont know if
hes ever going to be allowed anywhere near America again. He and his wife are still trying to
figure out what to do with their lives now; their dreams hadnt called for living out their lives in
Indonesia.
Unable to cope with Jakartas slums after having lived in the first world, Yudhi came to Bali
to see if he could make a living here, though hes having trouble being accepted into this society
because he isnt Balinesehes from Java. And the Balinese dont like the Javanese one
bit, thinking of them all as thieves and beggars. So Yudhi encounters more prejudice herein
his own nation of Indonesiathan he ever did back in New York. He doesnt know what to do
next. Maybe his wife, Ann, will come and join him here. Then againmaybe not. Whats here
for her? Their young marriage, conducted now entirely by e-mail, is on the rocks. Hes so out
of place here, so disoriented. Hes more of an American than he is anything else; Yudhi and I
use the same slang, we talk about our favorite restaurants in New York and we like all the
same movies. He comes over to my house in the evenings and I get him beers and he plays
me the most amazing songs on his guitar. I wish he were famous. If there was any fairness,
he would be so famous by now.
He says, Dudewhy is life all crazy like this?
Eat, Pray, Love

 84


 ketut, why is life all crazy like this? I asked my medicine man the next day.
He replied, Bhuta ia, dewa ia.
What does that mean?
Man is a demon, man is a god. Both true.
This was a familiar idea to me. Its very Indian, very Yogic. The notion is that human beings
are born, as my Guru has explained many times, with the equivalent potential for both
contraction and expansion. The ingredients of both darkness and light are equally present in
all of us, and then its up to the individual (or the family, or the society) to decide what will be
brought forththe virtues or the malevolence. The madness of this planet is largely a result of
the human beings difficulty in coming into virtuous balance with himself. Lunacy (both collective
and individual) results.
So what can we do about the craziness of the world?
Nothing. Ketut laughed, but with a dose of kindness. This is nature of world. This is destiny.
Worry about your craziness onlymake you in peace.
But how should we find peace within ourselves? I asked Ketut.
Meditation, he said. Purpose of meditation is only happiness and peacevery easy.
Today I will teach a new meditation, make you even better person. Is called Four Brothers
Meditation.
Ketut went on to explain that the Balinese believe we are each accompanied at birth by
four invisible brothers, who come into the world with us and protect us throughout our lives.
When the child is in the womb, her four siblings are even there with herthey are represented
by the placenta, the amniotic fluid, the umbilical cord and the yellow waxy substance that
protects an unborn babys skin. When the baby is born, the parents collect as much of these
extraneous birthing materials as possible, placing them in a coconut shell and burying it by
the front door of the familys house. According to the Balinese, this buried coconut is the holy
resting place of the four unborn brothers, and that spot is tended to forever, like a shrine.
The child is taught from earliest consciousness that she has these four brothers with her in
the world wherever she goes, and that they will always look after her. The brothers inhabit the
four virtues a person needs in order to be safe and happy in life: intelligence, friendship,
strength and (I love this one) poetry. The brothers can be called upon in any critical situation
for rescue and assistance. When you die, your four spirit brothers collect your soul and bring
you to heaven.
Today Ketut told me that hes never taught any Westerner the Four Brothers Meditation
yet, but he thinks I am ready for it. First, he taught me the names of my invisible siblingsAngo
Patih, Maragio Patih, Banus Patih and Banus Patih Ragio. He instructed me to
memorize these names and to ask for the help of my brothers throughout my life, whenever I
need them. He says I dont have to be formal when I speak to them, the way we are formal
when we pray to God. Im allowed to speak to my brothers with familiar affection, because It
just your family! He tells me to say their names as Im washing myself in the morning, and
they will join me. Say their names again every time before I eat, and I will include my brothers
in the enjoyment of the meal. Call on them before I go to sleep, saying, I am sleeping now,
so you must stay awake and protect me, and my brothers will shield me through the night,
stop demons and nightmares.
Thats good, I told him, because I have a problem sometimes with nightmares.
What nightmares?
I explained to the medicine man that Ive been having the same horrible nightmare since
childhood, namely that there is a man with a knife standing next to my bed. This nightmare is
so vivid, the man is so real, that it sometimes makes me scream out in fear. It leaves my heart
pounding every time (and has never been fun for those who share my bed, either). Ive been
having this nightmare every few weeks for as long as I can remember.
I told this to Ketut, and he told me I had been misunderstanding the vision for years. The
man with the knife in my bedroom is not an enemy; hes just one of my four brothers. Hes the
spirit brother who represents strength. Hes not there to attack me, but to guard me while I
sleep. Im probably waking up because Im sensing the commotion of my spirit brother fighting
away some demon who might be trying to hurt me. It is not a knife my brother is carrying, but
a krisa small, powerful dagger. I dont have to be afraid. I can go back to sleep, knowing I
am protected.
You lucky, Ketut said. Lucky you can see him. Sometimes I see my brothers in meditation,
but very rare for regular person to see like this. I think you have big spiritual power. I
hope maybe someday you become medicine woman.
OK, I said, laughing, but only if I can have my own TV series.
He laughed with me, not getting the joke, of course, but loving the idea that people make
jokes. Ketut then instructed me that whenever I speak to my four spirit brothers, I must tell
them who I am, so they can recognize me. I must use the secret nickname they have for me. I
must say, I am Lagoh Prano.
 Lagoh Prano means Happy Body.
I rode my bicycle back home, pushing my happy body up the hills toward my house in the
late afternoon sun. On my way through the forest, a big male monkey dropped out of a tree
right in front of me and bared his fangs at me. I didnt even flinch. I said, Back off, JackI got
four brothers protecting my ass, and I just rode right on by him.
Eat, Pray, Love

 85


 Although the next day (protective brothers notwithstanding) I did get hit by a bus. It was
sort of a smallish bus, but nevertheless it did knock me off my bicycle as I was cruising down
the shoulderless road. I got tossed into a cement irrigation ditch. About thirty Balinese people
on motorcycles stopped to help me, having witnessed the accident (the bus was long gone),
and everyone invited me to their house for tea or offered to drive me to the hospital, they all
felt so bad about the whole incident. It wasnt that serious a wreck, though, considering what it
might have been. My bicycle was fine, although the basket was bent and my helmet was
cracked. (Better the helmet than the head in such cases.) The worst of the damage was a
deep cut on my knee, full of bits of pebbles and dirt, that proceededover the next few days
in the moist tropical airto become nastily infected.
I didnt want to worry him, but a few days later I finally rolled up my pants leg on Ketut Liyers
porch, peeled off the yellowing bandage, and showed my wound to the old medicine man.
He peered at it, concerned.
Infect, he diagnosed. Painful.
Yes, I said.
You should go see doctor.
This was a little surprising. Wasnt he the doctor? But for some reason he didnt volunteer
to help and I didnt push it. Maybe he doesnt administer medication to Westerners. Or maybe
Ketut just had a secret hidden master plan, because it was my banged-up knee that allowed
me, in the end, to meet Wayan. And from that meeting, everything that was meant to happen .
. . happened.
Eat, Pray, Love

 86


 Wayan Nuriyasih is, like Ketut Liyer, a Balinese healer. There are some differences
between them, though. Hes elderly and male; shes a woman in her late thirties. Hes more of
a priestly figure, somewhat more mystical, while Wayan is a hands-on doctor, mixing herbs
and medications in her own shop and taking care of patients right there on the premises.
Wayan has a little storefront shop in the center of Ubud called Traditional Balinese Healing
Center. Id ridden my bike past it many times on my way down to Ketuts, noticing it because
of all the potted plants outside the place, and because of the blackboard with the curious
handwritten advertisement for the Multivitamin Lunch Special. But Id never gone into
the place before my knee got messed up. After Ketut sent me to find a doctor, though, I remembered
the shop and came by on my bicycle, hoping somebody there might be able to
help me deal with the infection.
Wayans place is a very small medical clinic and home and restaurant all at the same
time. Downstairs theres a tiny kitchen and a modest public eating area with three tables and
few chairs. Upstairs theres a private area where Wayan gives massages and treatments.
Theres one dark bedroom in the back.
I limped into the shop with my sore knee and introduced myself to Wayan the healera
strikingly attractive Balinese woman with a wide smile and shiny black hair down to her waist.
There were two shy young girls hiding behind her in the kitchen who smiled when I waved to
them, then ducked away again. I showed Wayan my infected wound and asked if she could
help. Soon Wayan had water and herbs boiling up on the stove, and was making me drink
jamutraditional Indonesian homemade medicinal concoctions. She placed hot green leaves
on my knee and it started to feel better immediately.
We got to talking. Her English was excellent. Because she is Balinese, she immediately
asked me the three standard introductory questionsWhere are you going today? Where are
you coming from? Are you married?
When I told her I wasnt married (Not yet!) she looked taken aback.
Never been married? she asked.
No, I lied. I dont like lying, but I generally have found its easier not to mention divorce to
the Balinese because they get so upset about it.
Really never been married? she asked again, and she was looking at me with great curiosity
now.
Honestly, I lied. Ive never been married.
You sure? This was getting weird.
Im totally sure!
Not even once? she asked.
OK, so she can see through me.
Well, I confessed, there was that one time . . .
And her face cleared like: Yes, I thought as much. She asked, Divorced?
Yes, I said, ashamed now. Divorced.
I could tell you are divorced.
Its not very common here, is it?
But me, too, said Wayan, entirely to my surprise. Me too, divorced.
 You?

I did everything I could, she said. I try everything before I got a divorce, praying every
day. But I had to go away from him.
Her eyes filled up with tears, and next thing you knew, I was holding Wayans hand, having
just met my first Balinese divorce, and I was saying, Im sure you did the best you could,
sweetie. Im sure you tried everything.
Divorce is too sad, she said.
I agreed.
I stayed there in Wayans shop for the next five hours, talking with my new best friend
about her troubles. She cleaned up the infection in my knee as I listened to her story. Wayans
Balinese husband, she told me, was a man who drink all the time, always gamble, lose
all our money, then beat me when I dont give him more money for to gamble and to drink.
She said, He beat me into the hospital many times. She parted her hair, showed me scars
on her head and said, This is from when he hit me with motorcycle helmet. Always, he was
hitting me with this motorcycle helmet when he is drinking, when I dont make money. He hit
me so much, I go unconscious, dizzy, cant see. I think it is lucky I am healer, my family are
healers, because I know how to heal myself after he beats me. I think if I was not healer, I
would lose my ears, you know, not be able to hear things anymore. Or maybe lose my eye,
not be able to see. She left him, she told me, after he beat her so severely that I lose my
baby, my second child, the one in my belly. After which incident their firstborn child, a bright
little girl with the nickname of Tutti, said, I think you should get a divorce, Mommy. Every time
you go to the hospital you leave too much work around the house for Tutti.
Tutti was four years old when she said this.
To exit a marriage in Bali leaves a person alone and unprotected in ways that are almost
impossible for a Westerner to imagine. The Balinese family unit, enclosed within the walls of a
family compound, is merely everythingfour generations of siblings, cousins, parents, grandparents
and children all living together in a series of small bungalows surrounding the family
temple, taking care of each other from birth to death. The family compound is the source of
strength, financial security, health care, day care, education andmost important to the
Balinesespiritual connection.
The family compound is so vital that the Balinese think of it as a single, living person. The
population of a Balinese village is traditionally counted not by the number of individuals, but
by the number of compounds. The compound is a self-sustaining universe. So you dont leave
it. (Unless, of course, you are a woman, in which case you move only onceout of your fathers
family compound and into your husbands.) When this system workswhich it does in
this healthy society almost all the timeit produces the most sane, protected, calm, happy
and balanced human beings in the world. But when it doesnt work? As with my new friend
Wayan? The outcasts are lost in airless orbit. Her choice was either to stay in the family compound
safety net with a husband who kept putting her in the hospital, or to save her own life
and leave, which left her with nothing.
Well, not exactly nothing, actually. She did take with her an encyclopedic knowledge of
healing, her goodness, her work ethic and her daughter Tuttiwhom she had to fight hard to
keep. Bali is a patriarchy to the end. In the rare case of a divorce, the children automatically
belong to the father. To get Tutti back, Wayan had to hire a lawyer, whom she paid with every
single thing she had. I meaneverything. She sold off not only her furniture and jewelry, but
also her forks and spoons, her socks and shoes, her old washcloths and half-burned
candleseverything went to pay that lawyer. But she did get her daughter back, in the end,
after a two-year battle. Wayan is just lucky Tutti was a girl; if shed been a boy, Wayan never
would have seen the kid again. Boys are much more valuable.
For the last few years now, Wayan and Tutti have been living on their ownall alone, in
the beehive of Bali!moving from place to place every few months as money comes and
goes, always sleepless with worry about where to go next. Which has been difficult because
every time she moves, her patients (mostly Balinese, who are all on hard times themselves
these days) have trouble finding her again. Also, with every move, little Tutti has to be pulled
out of school. Tutti was always first in her class before, but has slipped since the last move
down to twentieth out of fifty children.
In the middle of Wayans telling me this story, Tutti herself came charging into the shop,
having arrived home from school. Shes eight years old now and a mighty exhibition of charisma
and fireworks. This little cherry bomb of a girl (pigtailed and skinny and excited) asked
me in lively English if Id like to eat lunch, and Wayan said, I forgot! You should have lunch!
and the mother and daughter rushed into their kitchen andwith the help of the two shy
young girls hiding back thereproduced sometime later the best food Id tasted yet in Bali.
Little Tutti brought out each course of the meal with a bright-voiced explanation of what
was on the plate, wearing a huge grin, generally just being so totally peppy she shouldve
been spinning a baton.
Turmeric juice, for keep clean the kidneys! she announced.
Seaweed, for calcium!
Tomato salad, for vitamin D!
Mixed herbs, for not get malaria!
I finally said, Tutti, where did you learn to speak such good English?
From a book! she proclaimed.
I think you are a very clever girl, I informed her.
Thank you! she said, and did a spontaneous little happy dance. You are a very clever
girl, too!
Balinese kids arent normally like this, by the way. Theyre usually all quiet and polite, hiding
behind their mothers skirts. Not Tutti. She was all show-biz. She was all show and tell.
I will see you my books! Tutti sang, and hurtled up the stairs to get them.
She wants to be an animal doctor, Wayan told me. What is the word in English?
Veterinarian?
Yes. Veterinarian. But she has many questions about animals, I dont know how to answer.
She says, Mommy, if somebody brings me a sick tiger, do I bandage its teeth first, so it
doesnt bite me? If a snake gets sick and needs medicine, where is the opening? I dont know
where she gets these ideas. I hope she can go to university.
Tutti careened down the stairs, arms full of books, and zinged herself into her mothers
lap. Wayan laughed and kissed her daughter, all the sadness about the divorce suddenly
gone from her face. I watched them, thinking that little girls who make their mothers live grow
up to be such powerful women. Already, in the space of one afternoon, I was so in love with
this kid. I sent up a spontaneous prayer to God: May Tutti Nuriyasih someday bandage the
teeth of a thousand white tigers!
I loved Tuttis mother, too. But Id been in their shop now for hours and felt I should leave.
Some other tourists had wandered into the place, and were hoping to be served lunch. One of
the tourists, a brassy older broad from Australia, was loudly asking if Wayan could please
help cure her godawful constipation. I was thinking, Sing it a little louder, honey, and we can
all dance to it . . .
I will come back tomorrow, I promised Wayan, and Ill order the multivitamin lunch special
again.
Your knee is better now, Wayan said. Quickly better. No infection anymore.
She wiped the last of the green herbal goo off my leg, then sort of jiggled my kneecap
around a bit, feeling for something. Then she felt the other knee, closing her eyes. She
opened her eyes, grinned and said, I can tell by your knees that you dont have much sex
lately.
I said, Why? Because theyre so close together?
She laughed. Noits the cartilage. Very dry. Hormones from sex lubricate the joints.
How long since sex for you?
About a year and a half.
You need a good man. I will find one for you. I will pray at the temple for a good man for
you, because now you are my sister. Also, if you come back tomorrow, I will clean your kidneys
for you.
A good man and clean kidneys, too? That sounds like a great deal.
I never tell anybody these things before about my divorce, she told me. But my life is
heavy, too much sad, too much hard. I dont understand why life is so hard.
Then I did a strange thing. I took both the healers hands in mine and I said with the most
powerful conviction, The hardest part of your life is behind you now, Wayan.
I left the shop, then, trembling unaccountably, all jammed up with some potent intuition or
impulse that I could not yet identify or release.
Eat, Pray, Love

 87


 Now my days are divided into natural thirds. I spend my mornings with Wayan at her shop,
laughing and eating. I spend my afternoons with Ketut the medicine man, talking and drinking
coffee. I spend my evenings in my lovely garden, either hanging out by myself and reading a
book, or sometimes talking with Yudhi, who comes over to play his guitar. Every morning, I
meditate while the sun comes up over the rice fields, and before bedtime I speak to my four
spirit brothers and ask them to watch over me while I sleep.
Ive been here only a few weeks and I feel a rather mission-accomplished sensation
already. The task in Indonesia was to search for balance, but I dont feel like Im searching for
anything anymore because the balance has somehow naturally come into place. Its not that
Im becoming Balinese (no more than I ever became Italian or Indian) but only thisI can feel
my own peace, and I love the swing of my days between easeful devotional practices and the
pleasures of beautiful landscape, dear friends and good food. Ive been praying a lot lately,
comfortably and frequently. Most of the time, I find that I want to pray when Im on my bicycle,
riding home from Ketuts house through the monkey forest and the rice terraces in the dusky
late afternoons. I pray, of course, not to be hit by another bus, or jumped by a monkey or bit
by a dog, but thats just superfluous; most of my prayers are expressions of sheer gratitude
for the fullness of my contentment. I have never felt less burdened by myself or by the world.
I keep remembering one of my Gurus teachings about happiness. She says that people
universally tend to think that happiness is a stroke of luck, something that will maybe descend
upon you like fine weather if youre fortunate enough. But thats not how happiness works.
Happiness is the consequence of personal effort. You fight for it, strive for it, insist upon it,
and sometimes even travel around the world looking for it. You have to participate relentlessly
in the manifestations of your own blessings. And once you have achieved a state of happiness,
you must never become lax about maintaining it, you must make a mighty effort to keep
swimming upward into that happiness forever, to stay afloat on top of it. If you dont, you will
leak away your innate contentment. Its easy enough to pray when youre in distress but continuing
to pray even when your crisis has passed is like a sealing process, helping your soul
hold tight to its good attainments.
Recalling these teachings as I ride my bike so freely in the sunset through Bali, I keep
making prayers that are really vows, presenting my state of harmony to God and saying, This
is what I would like to hold on to. Please help me memorize this feeling of contentment and
help me always support it. Im putting this happiness in a bank somewhere, not merely FDIC
protected but guarded by my four spirit brothers, held there as insurance against future trials
in life. This is a practice Ive come to call Diligent Joy. As I focus on Diligent Joy, I also keep
remembering a simple idea my friend Darcey told me oncethat all the sorrow and trouble of
this world is caused by unhappy people. Not only in the big global Hitler-n-Stalin picture, but
also on the smallest personal level. Even in my own life, I can see exactly where my episodes
of unhappiness have brought suffering or distress or (at the very least) inconvenience to
those around me. The search for contentment is, therefore, not merely a self-preserving and
self-benefiting act, but also a generous gift to the world. Clearing out all your misery gets you
out of the way. You cease being an obstacle, not only to yourself but to anyone else. Only
then are you free to serve and enjoy other people.
At the moment, the person Im enjoying the most is Ketut. The old mantruly one of the
happiest humans Ive ever encounteredis giving me his full access, the freedom to ask any
lingering questions about divinity, about human nature. I like the meditations he has taught
me, the comic simplicity of smile in your liver and the reassuring presence of the four spirit
brothers. The other day the medicine man told me that he knows sixteen different meditation
techniques, and many mantras for all different purposes. Some of them are to bring peace or
happiness, some of them are for health, but some of them are purely mysticalto transport
him into other realms of consciousness. For instance, he said, he knows one meditation that
takes him to up.
To up? I asked. What is to up?
To seven levels up, he said. To heaven.
Hearing the familiar idea of seven levels, I asked him if he meant that his meditation took
him up through the seven sacred chakras of the body, which are discussed in Yoga.
Not chakras, he said. Places. This meditation takes me seven places in universe. Up
and up. Last place I go is heaven.
I asked, Have you been to heaven, Ketut?
He smiled. Of course he had been there, he said. Easy to go to heaven.
What is it like?
Beautiful. Everything beautiful is there. Every person beautiful is there. Everything beautiful
to eat is there. Everything is love there. Heaven is love.
Then Ketut said he knows another meditation. To down. This down meditation takes him
seven levels below the world. This is a more dangerous meditation. Not for beginning people,
only for a master.
I asked, So if you go up to heaven in the first meditation, then, in the second meditation
you must go down to . . . ?
Hell, he finished the statement.
This was interesting. Heaven and hell arent ideas Ive heard discussed very much in
Hinduism. Hindus see the universe in terms of karma, a process of constant circulation, which
is to say that you dont really end up anywhere at the end of your lifenot in heaven or
hellbut just get recycled back to the earth again in another form, in order to resolve
whatever relationships or mistakes you left uncompleted last time. When you finally achieve
perfection, you graduate out of the cycle entirely and melt into The Void. The notion of karma
implies that heaven and hell are only to be found here on earth, where we have the capacity
to create them, manufacturing either goodness or evil depending on our destinies and our
characters.
Karma is a notion Ive always liked. Not so much literally. Not necessarily because I believe
that I used to be Cleopatras bartenderbut more metaphorically. The karmic philosophy
appeals to me on a metaphorical level because even in one lifetime its obvious how often
we must repeat our same mistakes, banging our heads against the same old addictions
and compulsions, generating the same old miserable and often catastrophic consequences,
until we can finally stop and fix it. This is the supreme lesson of karma (and also of Western
psychology, by the way)take care of the problems now, or else youll just have to suffer
again later when you screw everything up the next time. And that repetition of sufferingthats
hell. Moving out of that endless repetition to a new level of understandingtheres
where youll find heaven.
But here Ketut was talking about heaven and hell in a different way, as if they are real
places in the universe which he has actually visited. At least I think thats what he meant.
Trying to get clear on this, I asked, You have been to hell, Ketut?
He smiled. Of course hes been there.
Whats it like in hell?
Same like heaven, he said.
He saw my confusion and tried to explain. Universe is a circle, Liss.
I still wasnt sure I understood.
He said. To up, to downall same, at end.
I remembered an old Christian mystic notion: As above, so below. I asked. Then how can
you tell the difference between heaven and hell?
Because of how you go. Heaven, you go up, through seven happy places. Hell, you go
down, through seven sad places. This is why it better for you to go up, Liss. He laughed.
I asked, You mean, you might as well spend your life going upward, through the happy
places, since heaven and hellthe destinationsare the same thing anyway?
Same-same, he said. Same in end, so better to be happy on journey.
I said, So, if heaven is love, then hell is . . .
Love, too, he said.
I sat with that one for a while, trying to make the math work.
Ketut laughed again, slapped my knee affectionately with his hand.
Always so difficult for young person to understand this!
Eat, Pray, Love

 88


 So I was hanging out in Wayans shop again this morning, and she was trying to figure out
how to make my hair grow faster and thicker. Having glorious thick, shiny hair herself that
hangs all the way down to her butt, she feels sorry for me with my wispy blond mop. As a
healer, of course, she does have a remedy to help thicken my hair, but it wont be easy. First,
I have to find a banana tree and personally cut it down. I have to throw away the top of the
tree, then carve the trunk and roots (which are still lodged in the earth) into a big, deep bowl
like a swimming pool. Then I have to put a piece of wood over the top of this hollow, so rainwater
and dew dont get in. Then I will come back in a few days and find that the swimming
pool is now filled with the nutrient-rich liquid of the banana root, which I then must collect in
bottles and bring to Wayan. She will bless the banana root juice at the temple for me, then rub
the juice into my skull every day. Within a few months I will have, like Wayan, thick, shiny hair
all the way down to my butt.
Even if you are bald, she said, this will make you have hair.
As were talking, little Tuttijust home from schoolis sitting on the floor, drawing a picture
of a house. Mostly, houses are what Tutti draws these days. Shes dying to have a house
of her own. Theres always a rainbow in the backdrop of her pictures, and a smiling familyfather
and all.
This is what we do all day in Wayans shop. We sit and talk and Tutti draws pictures and
Wayan and I gossip and tease each other. Wayans got a bawdy sense of humor, always talking
about sex, busting me about being single, speculating on the genital endowments of all
the men who pass by her shop. She keeps telling me shes been going to the temple every
evening and praying for a good man to show up in my life, to be my lover.
I told her again this morning, No, WayanI dont need it. My hearts been broken too
many times.
She said, I know cure for broken heart. Authoritatively, and in a doctorly manner, Wayan
ticked off on her fingers the six elements of her Fail-Proof Broken-Heart Curing Treatment:
Vitamin E, get much sleep, drink much water, travel to a place far away from the person you
loved, meditate and teach your heart that this is destiny.
Ive been doing everything but the vitamin E.
So now you cured. And now you need a new man. I bring you one, from praying.
Well, Im not praying for a new man, Wayan. The only thing Im praying for these days is
to have peace with myself.
Wayan rolled her eyes, like Yeah, right, whatever you claim, you big white weirdo, and
said, Thats because you have bad memory problem. You dont remember anymore how
nice is sex. I used to have bad memory problem, too, when I was married. Every time I saw a
handsome man walking down the street, I would forget I had a husband back home.
She nearly fell over laughing. Then she composed herself and concluded, Everybody
need sex, Liz.
At this moment, a great-looking woman came walking into the shop, smiling like a lighthouse
beam. Tutti leapt up and ran into her arms, shouting, Armenia! Armenia! Armenia!
Which, as it turned out, was the womans namenot some kind of strange nationalist battle
cry. I introduced myself to Armenia, and she told me she was from Brazil. She was so dynamic,
this womanso Brazilian. She was gorgeous, elegantly dressed, charismatic and engaging
and indeterminate in age, just insistently sexy.
Armenia, too, is a friend of Wayans, who comes to the shop frequently for lunch and for
various traditional medical and beauty treatments. She sat down and talked with us for about
an hour, joining our gossiping, girlish little circle. Shes in Bali for only another week before
she has to fly off to Africa, or maybe its back to Thailand, to take care of her business. This
Armenia woman, it turns out, has had just the teensiest bit of glamorous life. She used to
work for the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees. Back in the 1980s she had
been sent into the El Salvadoran and Nicaraguan jungles during the height of war as a negotiator
of peace, using her beauty and charm and wits to get all the generals and rebels to calm
down and listen to reason. (Hello, pretty power!) Now she runs a multinational marketing business
called Novica, which supports indigenous artists all over the world by selling their
products on the Internet. She speaks about seven or eight languages. Shes got the most fabulous
pair of shoes Ive seen since Rome.
Looking at us both, Wayan said, Lizwhy do you never try to look sexy, like Armenia?
You such a pretty girl, you have good capital of nice face, nice body, nice smile. But always
you wear this same broken T-shirt, same broken jeans. Dont you want to be sexy, like her?
Wayan, I said, Armenia is Brazilian. Its a completely different situation.
How is it different?
Armenia, I said, turning to my new friend. Can you please try to explain to Wayan what
it means to be a Brazilian woman?
Armenia laughed, but then seemed to consider the question seriously and answered,
Well, I always tried to look nice and be feminine even in the war zones and refugee camps of
Central America. Even in the worst tragedies and crisis, theres no reason to add to everyones
misery by looking miserable yourself. Thats my philosophy. This is why I always wore
makeup and jewelry into the junglenothing too extravagant, but maybe just a nice gold
bracelet and some earrings, a little lipstick, good perfume. Just enough to show that I still had
my self-respect.
In a way, Armenia reminds me of those great Victorian-era British lady travelers, who used
to say theres no excuse for wearing clothes in Africa that would be unsuited for an English
drawing room. Shes a butterfly, this Armenia. And she couldnt stay for too long at Wayans
shop because she had work to do, but that didnt stop her from inviting me to a party tonight.
She knows another Brazilian expat in Ubud, she told me, and hes hosting a special event at
a nice restaurant this evening. Hell be cooking a feijoadaa traditional Brazilian feast consisting
of massive piles of pork and black beans. There will be Brazilian cocktails, as well.
Lots of interesting expatriates from all over the world who live here in Bali. Would I care to
come? They might all go out dancing later, too. She doesnt know if I like parties, but . . .
Cocktails? Dancing? Piles of pork?
Of course Ill come.
Eat, Pray, Love

 89


 I cant remember the last time I got dressed up, but this evening I dug out my one fancy
spaghetti-strap dress from the bottom of my backpack and slithered it on. I even wore lipstick.
I cant remember the last time I wore lipstick, but I know it wasnt anywhere near India. I
stopped at Armenias house on the way over to the party, and she draped me in some of her
fancy jewelry, let me borrow her fancy perfume, let me store my bicycle in her backyard so I
could arrive at the party in her fancy car, like a proper adult woman.
The dinner with the expatriates was great fun, and I felt myself revisiting all these longdormant
aspects of my personality. I even got a little bit drunk, which was notable after all the
purity of my last few months of praying at the Ashram and sipping tea in my Balinese flower
garden. And I was flirting! I hadnt flirted in ages. Id only been hanging around with monks
and medicine men lately, but suddenly I was dusting off the old sexuality again. Though I
couldnt really tell who I was flirting with. I was kind of spreading it around everywhere. Was I
attracted to the witty Australian former journalist sitting next to me? (Were all drunks here,
he quipped. We write references for other drunks.) Or was it the quiet intellectual German
down the table? (He promised to lend me novels from his personal library.) Or was it the
handsome older Brazilian man who had cooked this giant feast for all of us in the first place?
(I liked his kind brown eyes and his accent. And his cooking, of course. I said something very
provocative to him, out of nowhere. He was making a joke at his own expense, saying, Im a
full catastrophe of a Brazilian manI cant dance, I cant play soccer and I cant play any musical
instruments. For some reason I replied, Maybe so. But I have a feeling you could play
a very good Casanova. Time stopped solid for a long, long moment, then, as we looked at
each other frankly, like, That was an interesting idea to lay on this table. The boldness of my
statement hovered in the air around us like a fragrance. He didnt deny it. I looked away first,
feeling myself blush.)
His feijoada was amazing, anyway. Decadent, spicy and richeverything you cant normally
get in Balinese food. I ate plate after plate of the pork and decided that it was official: I
can never be a vegetarian, not with food like this in the world. And then we went out dancing
at this local nightclub, if you can call it a nightclub. It was more like a groovy beach shack,
only without the beach. There was a live band of Balinese kids playing good reggae music,
and the place was mixed up with revelers of all ages and nationalities, expats and tourists and
locals and gorgeous Balinese boys and girls, all dancing freely, unself-consciously. Armenia
hadnt come along, claiming she had to work the next day, but the handsome older Brazilian
man was my host. He wasnt such a bad dancer as he claimed. Probably he can play soccer,
too. I liked having him nearby, opening doors for me, complimenting me, calling me darling.
Then again, I noticed that he called everyone darlingeven the hairy male bartender. Still,
the attention was nice . . .
It had been so long since Id been in a bar. Even in Italy I didnt go to bars, and I hadnt
been out much during the David years, either. I think the last time Id gone dancing was back
when I was married . . . back when I was happily married, come to think of it. Dear God, it had
been ages. Out on the dance floor I ran into my friend Stefania, a lively young Italian girl Id
met recently in a meditation class in Ubud, and we danced together, hair flying everywhere,
blond and dark, spinning merrily around. Sometime after midnight, the band stopped playing
and people mingled.
Thats when I met the guy named Ian. Oh, I really liked this guy. Right away I really liked
him. He was very good-looking, in a kind of Sting-meets-Ralph-Fienness-younger-brother
sort of way. He was Welsh, so he had that lovely voice. He was articulate, smart, asked questions,
spoke to my friend Stefania in the same baby Italian that I speak. It turned out that he
was the drummer in this reggae band, that he played bongos. So I made a joke that he was a
bonga-leer, like those guys in Venice, but with percussion instead of boats, and somehow
we hit it off, started laughing and talking.
Felipe came over thenthat was the Brazilians name, Felipe. He invited us all to go out
to this funky local restaurant owned by European expatriates, a wildly permissive place that
never closes, he promised, where beer and bullshit are served at all hours. I found myself
looking to Ian (did he want to go?) and when he said yes, I said yes, also. So we all went to
the restaurant and I sat with Ian and we talked and joked all night, and, oh, I really liked this
guy. He was the first man Id met in a long while who I really liked in that way, as they say. He
was a few years older than me, had led a most interesting life with all the good rsum points
(liked The Simpsons, traveled all over the world, lived in an Ashram once, mentioned Tolstoy,
seemed to be employed, etc.). Hed started his career in the British Army in Northern Ireland
as a bomb squad expert, then became an international mine-field detonation guy. Built
refugee camps in Bosnia, was now taking a break in Bali to work on music . . . all very alluring
stuff.
I could not believe I was still up at 3:30 AM, and not to meditate, either! I was up in the
middle of the night and wearing a dress and talking to an attractive man. How terribly radical.
At the end of the evening, Ian and I admitted to each other how nice it had been to meet. He
asked if I had a phone number and I told him I didnt, but that I did have e-mail, and he said,
Yeah, but e-mail just feels so . . . ech . . . So at the end of the night we didnt exchange anything
but a hug. He said, Well see each other again when theypointing to the gods up in
the skysay so.
Just before dawn, Felipe the handsome older Brazilian man offered me a ride home. As
we rode up the twisting back roads he said, Darling, youve been talking to the biggest bullshitter
in Ubud all night long.
My heart sank.
Is Ian really a bullshitter? I asked. Tell me the truth now and save me the trouble later.
Ian? said Felipe. He laughed. No, darling! Ian is a serious guy. Hes a good man. I
meant myself. Im the biggest bullshitter in Ubud.
We rode along in silence for a while.
And Im just teasing, anyway, he added.
Then another long silence and he asked, You like Ian, dont you?
I dont know, I said. My head wasnt clear. Id been drinking too many Brazilian cocktails.
Hes attractive, intelligent. Its been a long time since I thought about liking anybody.
Youre going to have a wonderful few months here in Bali. You wait and see.
But I dont know how much more socializing I can do, Felipe. I only have the one dress.
People will start to notice that Im wearing the same thing all the time.
Youre young and beautiful, darling. You only need the one dress.
Eat, Pray, Love

 90


 Am I young and beautiful?
I thought I was old and divorced.
I can barely sleep at all this night, so unaccustomed to these odd hours, the dance music
still thrumming in my head, my hair smelling of cigarettes, my stomach protesting the alcohol.
I doze a bit, then wake as the sun comes up, just as I am accustomed to. Only this morning I
am not rested and I am not at peace and Im in no condition whatsoever for meditation. Why
am I so agitated? I had a nice night, didnt I? I got to meet some interesting people, got to
dress up and dance around, had flirted with some men . . .
 MEN.

The agitation gets more jagged at the thought of that word, turning into a minor panic assailment.
I dont know how to do this anymore. I used to be the biggest and boldest and most
shameless of flirts when I was in my teens and twenties. I seem to remember that it was once
fun, meeting some guy, spooling him in toward me, spooning out the veiled invitations and the
provocations, casting all caution aside and letting the consequences spill how they will.
But now I am feeling only panic and uncertainty. I start blowing the whole evening up into
something much huger than it was, imagining myself getting involved with this Welsh guy who
hadnt even given me an e-mail address. I can see all the way into our future already, including
the arguments over his smoking habit. I wonder if giving myself to a man again will ruin
my journey/writing/life, etc. On the other handsome romance would be nice. Its been a
long, dry time. (I remember Richard from Texas advising me at one point, vis--vis my love
life, You need a droughtbreaker, baby. Gotta go find yoself a rainmaker.) Then I imagine Ian
zooming over on his motorbike with his handsome bomb-squad torso to make love to me in
my garden, and how nice that would be. This not-entirely-unpleasant thought somehow
screeches me, however, into a horrible skid about how I just dont want to go through any
heartache again. Then I start to miss David more than I have in months, thinking, Maybe I
should call him and see if he wants to try getting together again . . . (Then I receive a very ac-
curate channeling of my old friend Richard, saying, Oh, thats genius, Groceriesdidja get a
lobotomy last night, in addition to gettin a little tipsy?) Its never a far leap from ruminating
about David to obsessing about the circumstances of my divorce, and so soon I start brooding
(just like old times) about my ex-husband, my divorce . . .
 I thought we were done with this topic, Groceries.

And then I start thinking about Felipe, for some reasonthat handsome older Brazilian
man. Hes nice. Felipe. He says I am young and beautiful and that I will have a wonderful time
here time in Bali. Hes right, right? I should relax and have some fun, right? But this morning it
doesnt feel fun.
I dont know how to do this anymore.
Eat, Pray, Love

 91


 What is this life? Do you understand? I dont.
This was Wayan talking.
I was back in her restaurant, eating her delicious and nutritious multivitamin lunch special,
hoping it would help ease my hangover and my anxiety. Armenia the Brazilian woman was
there, too, looking, as always, like shed just stopped by the beauty parlor on her way home
from a weekend at a spa. Little Tutti was sitting on the floor, drawing pictures of houses, as
usual.
Wayan had just learned that the lease on her shop was going to come up for renewal at
the end of Augustonly three months from nowand that her rent would be raised. She
would probably have to move again because she couldnt afford to stay here. Except that she
only had about fifty dollars in the bank, and no idea where to go. Moving would take Tutti out
of school again. They needed a homea real home. This is no way for a Balinese person to
live.
Why does suffering never end? Wayan asked. She wasnt crying, merely posing a
simple, unanswerable and weary question. Why must everything be repeat and repeat, never
finish, never resting? You work so hard one day, but the next day, you must only work again.
You eat, but the next day, you are already hungry. You find love, then love go away. You are
born with nothingno watch, no T-shirt. You work hard, then you die with nothingno watch,
no T-shirt. You are young, then you are old. No matter how hard you work, you cannot stop
getting old.
Not Armenia, I joked. She doesnt get old, apparently.
Wayan said, But this is because Armenia is Brazilian, catching on now to how the world
works. We all laughed, but it was a fair breed of gallows humor, because theres nothing
funny about Wayans situation in the world right now. Here are the facts: Single mom, precocious
child, hand-to-mouth business, imminent poverty, virtual homelessness. Where will she
go? Cant live with the ex-husbands family, obviously. Wayans own family are rice farmers
way out in the countryside and poor. If she goes and lives with them, its the end of her business
as a healer in town because her patients wont be able to reach her and you can pretty
much forget about Tutti ever getting enough education to go someday to Animal Doctor College.

Other factors have emerged over time. Those two shy girls I noticed on the first day, hiding
in the back of the kitchen? It turns out that these are a pair of orphans Wayan has adopted.
They are both named Ketut (just to further confuse this book) and we call them Big Ketut
and Little Ketut. Wayan found the Ketuts starving and begging in the marketplace a few
months ago. They were abandoned there by a Dickensian character of a womanpossibly a
relativewho acts as a sort of begging child pimp, depositing parentless children in various
marketplaces across Bali to beg for money, then picking the kids up every night in a van, collecting
their proceeds and giving them a shack somewhere in which to sleep. When Wayan
first found Big and Little Ketut, they hadnt eaten for days, had lice and parasites, the works.
She thinks the younger one is maybe ten and the older one might be thirteen, but they dont
know their own ages or even their last names. (Little Ketut knows only that she was born the
same year as the big pig in her village; this hasnt helped the rest of us establish a timeline.)
Wayan has taken them in and cares for them as lovingly as she does her own Tutti. She and
the three children all sleep on the same mattress in the one bedroom behind the shop.
How a Balinese single mother facing eviction found it in her heart to take in two extra
homeless children is something that reaches far beyond any understanding Ive ever had
about the meaning of compassion.
I want to help them.
That was it. This is what that trembling feeling was, which Id experienced so profoundly
after meeting Wayan for the first time. I wanted to help this single mother with her daughter
and her extra orphans. I wanted to valet-park them into a better life. Its just that I hadnt been
able to figure out how to do it. But today as Wayan and Armenia and I were eating our lunch
and weaving our typical conversation of empathy and chopsbusting, I looked over at little Tutti
and noticed that she was doing something rather odd. She was walking around the shop with
a single, small square of pretty cobalt blue ceramic tile resting on the palms of her upturned
hands, singing in a chanting sort of way. I watched her for a while, just to see what she was
up to. Tutti played with that tile for a long time, tossing it in the air, whispering to it, singing to
it, then pushing it along the floor like it was a Matchbox car. Finally she sat upon it in a quiet
corner, eyes closed, singing to herself, buried in some mystical, invisible compartment of
space all her own.
I asked Wayan what this was all about. She said that Tutti had found the tile outside the
construction site of a fancy hotel project down the road and had pocketed it. Ever since Tutti
had found the tile, she kept saying to her mother, Maybe if we have a house someday, it can
have a pretty blue floor, like this. Now, according to Wayan, Tutti often likes to sit perched on
that one tiny blue square for hours on end, shutting her eyes and pretending shes inside her
own house.
What can I say? When I heard that story, and looked at that child deep in meditation upon
her small blue tile, I was like: OK, that does it.
And I excused myself from the shop to go take care of this intolerable state of affairs once
and for all.
Eat, Pray, Love

 92


 Wayan once told me that sometimes when shes healing her patients she becomes an
open pipeline for Gods love, and she ceases even thinking about what needs to be done
next. The intellect stops, the intuition rises and all she has to do is permit her God-ness to
flow through her. She says, It feels like a wind comes and takes my hands.
This same wind, maybe, is the thing that blew me out of Wayans shop that day, that
pushed me out of my hung-over anxiety about whether I was ready to start dating again, and
guided me over to Ubuds local Internet caf, where I sat and wrotein one effortless
drafta fund-raising e-mail to all my friends and family across the world.
I told everyone that my birthday was coming up in July and that soon I would be turning
thirty-five. I told them that there was nothing in this world that I needed or wanted, and that I
had never been happier in my life. I told them that, if I were home in New York, I would be
planning a big stupid birthday party and I would make them all come to this party, and they
would have to buy me gifts and bottles of wine and the whole celebration would get ridiculously
expensive. Therefore, I explained, a cheaper and more lovely way to help celebrate this
birthday would be if my friends and family would care to make a donation to help a woman
named Wayan Nuriyasih buy a house in Indonesia for herself and her children.
Then I told the whole story of Wayan and Tutti and the orphans and their situation. I promised
that whatever money was donated, I would match the donation from my own savings. Of
course I was aware, I explained, that this is a world full of untold suffering and war and that
everyone is in need right now, but what are we to do? This little group of people in Bali had
become my family, and we must take care of our families wherever we find them. As I
wrapped up the mass e-mail, I remembered something my friend Susan had said to me before
I left on this world journey nine months ago. She was afraid I would never come home
again. She said, I know how you are, Liz. Youre going to meet somebody and fall in love and
end up buying a house in Bali.
A regular Nostradamus, that Susan.
By the next morning, when I checked my e-mail, $700 had already been pledged. The
next day, donations passed what I could afford to match.
I wont go through the entire drama of the week, or try to explain what it feels like to open
e-mails every day from all over the world that all say, Count me in! Everyone gave. People
whom I personally knew to be broke or in debt gave, without hesitation. One of the first responses
I got was from a friend of my hairdressers girlfriend, whod been forwarded the email
and wanted to donate $15. My most wise-ass friend John had to make a typically sarcastic
comment, of course, about how long and sappy and emotional my letter had been
(Listennext time you feel the need to cry about spilled milk, make sure its condensed, will
ya?), but then he donated money anyway. My friend Annies new boyfriend (a Wall Street
banker whom Id never even met) offered to double the final sum of whatever was raised.
Then that e-mail started whipping around the world, so that I began to receive donations from
perfect strangers. It was a global smothering of generosity. Lets just wrap up this episode by
saying thata mere seven days after the original plea went out over the wiresmy friends
and my family and a bunch of strangers all over the world helped me come up with almost
$18,000 to buy Wayan Nuriyasih a home of her own.
I knew that it was Tutti who had manifested this miracle, through the potency of her prayers,
willing that little blue tile of hers to soften and expand around her and to growlike one of
Jacks magic beansinto an actual home that would take care of herself and her mother and
a pair of orphans forever.
One last thing. Im embarrassed to admit that it was my friend Bob, not me, who noticed
the obvious fact that the word Tutti in Italian means Everybody. How had I not realized that
earlier? After all those months in Rome! I just didnt see the connection. So it was Bob over in
Utah who had to point it out to me. He did so in an e-mail last week, saying, along with his
pledge to donate toward the new house, So thats the final lesson, isnt it? When you set out
in the world to help yourself, you inevitably end up helping . . . Tutti.
Eat, Pray, Love

 93


 I dont want to tell Wayan about it, not until all the money has been raised. Its hard to keep
a big secret like this, especially when shes in such constant worry about her future, but I dont
want to get her hopes up until it is official. So for the whole week, I keep my mouth shut about
my plans, and I keep myself occupied having dinner almost every night with Felipe the Brazilian,
who doesnt seem to mind that I own only one nice dress.
I guess I have a crush on him. After a few dinners, Im fairly certain I have a crush on him.
Hes more than he appears, this self-proclaimed bullshit master who knows everyone in
Ubud and is always the center of the party. I asked Armenia about him. Theyve been friends
for a while. I said, That Felipehes got more depth than the others, doesnt he? Theres
something more to him, isnt there? She said, Oh, yes. Hes a good, kind man. But hes
been through a hard divorce. I think hes come to Bali to recover.
Ahnow this is a subject I know nothing about.
But hes fifty-two years old. This is interesting. Have I truly reached the age where a fiftytwo-year-old
man is within my realm of dating consideration? I like him, though. Hes got silver
hair and hes balding in an attractively Picassoesque manner. His eyes are warm and brown.
He has a gentle face and he smells wonderful. And he is an actual grown man. The adult
male of the speciesa bit of a novelty in my experience.
Hes been living in Bali for about five years now, working with Balinese silversmiths to
make jewelry from Brazilian gemstones for export to America. I like the fact that he was faithfully
married for almost twenty years before his marriage deteriorated for its own multicomplicated
plethora of reasons. I like the fact that he has already raised children, and that he raised
them well, and that they love him. I like that he was the parent who stayed home and tended
to his children when they were little, while his Australian wife pursued her career. (A good
feminist husband, he says, I wanted to be on the correct side of social history.) I like his natural
Brazilian over-the-top displays of affection. (When his Australian son was fourteen years
old, the boy finally had to say, Dad, now that Im fourteen, maybe you shouldnt kiss me on
the mouth anymore when you drop me off at school.) I like the fact that Felipe speaks four,
maybe more, languages fluently. (He keeps claiming he doesnt speak Indonesian, but I hear
him talking it all day long.) I like that hes traveled through over fifty countries in his life, and
that he sees the world as a small and easily managed place. I like the way he listens to me,
leaning in, interrupting me only when I interrupt myself to ask if I am boring him, to which he
always responds, I have all the time in the world for you, my lovely little darling. I like being
called my lovely little darling.(Even if the waitress gets it, too.)
He said to me the other night, Why dont you take a lover while youre in Bali, Liz?
To his credit, he didnt just mean himself, though I believe he might be willing to take on
the job. He assured me that Ianthat good-looking Welsh guywould be a fine match for
me, but there are other candidates, too. Theres a chef from New York City, a great, big,
muscular, confident fellow, whom he thinks I might like. Really there are all sorts of men
here, he said, all of them floating through Ubud, expatriates from everywhere, hiding out in
this shifting community of the planets homeless and assetless, many of whom would be
happy to see to it, my lovely darling, that you have a wonderful summer here.
I dont think Im ready for it, I told him. I dont feel like going through all the effort of romance
again, you know? I dont feel like having to shave my legs every day or having to show
my body to a new lover. And I dont want to have to tell my life story all over again, or worry
about birth control. Anyway, Im not even sure I know how to do it anymore. I feel like I was
more confident about sex and romance when I was sixteen than I am now.
Of course you were, Felipe said. You were young and stupid then. Only the young and
stupid are confident about sex and romance. Do you think any of us know what were doing?
Do you think theres any way humans can love each other without complication? You should
see how it happens in Bali, darling. All these Western men come here after theyve made a
mess of their lives back home, and they decide theyve had it with Western women, and they
go marry some tiny, sweet, obedient little Balinese teenage girl. I know what theyre thinking.
They think this pretty little girl will make them happy, make their lives easy. But whenever I
see it happen, I always want to say the same thing. Good luck. Because you still have a woman
in front of you, my friend. And you are still a man. Its still two human beings trying to get
along, so its going to become complicated. And love is always complicated. But still humans
must try to love each other, darling. We must get our hearts broken sometimes. This is a good
sign, having a broken heart. It means we have tried for something.
I said, My heart was broken so badly last time that it still hurts. Isnt that crazy? To still
have a broken heart almost two years after a love story ends?
Darling, Im southern Brazilian. I can keep a broken heart going for ten years over a woman
I never even kissed.
We talk about our marriages, our divorces. Not in a petty way, but just to commiserate.
We compare notes about the bottomless depths of post-divorce depression. We drink wine
and eat well together and we tell each other the nicest stories we can remember about former
spouses, just to take the sting out of all that conversation about loss.
He says, Do you want to do something with me this weekend? and I find myself saying
yes, that would be nice. Because it would be nice.
Twice now, dropping me off in front of my house and saying goodnight, Felipe has
reached across the car to give me a goodnight kiss, and twice now Ive done the same
thingallowing myself to be pulled into him, but then ducking my head at the last moment
and tucking my cheek up against his chest. There, I let him hold me for a while. Longer than
is necessarily merely friendly. I can feel him press his face into my hair, as my face presses
somewhere against his sternum. I can smell his soft linen shirt. I really like the way he smells.
He has muscular arms, a nice wide chest. He was once a champion gymnast back in Brazil.
Of course that was in 1969, which was the year I was born, but still. His body feels strong.
My ducking my head like this whenever he reaches for me is a kind of hidingIm avoiding
a simple goodnight kiss. But its also a kind of not-hiding, too. By letting him hold me at all
during those long quiet moments at the end of the evening, Im letting myself be held.
Which hasnt happened for a long time.
Eat, Pray, Love

 94


 I asked Ketut, my old medicine man, What do you know about romance?
He said, What is this, romance?
Never mind.
Nowhat it is? What this word means?
Romance. I defined. Women and men in love. Or sometimes men and men in love, or
women and women in love. Kissing and sex and marriageall that stuff.
I not make sex with too many people in my life, Liss. Only with my wife.
Youre rightthats not too many people. But do you mean your first wife or your second
wife?
I only have one wife, Liss. She dead now.
What about Nyomo?
Nyomo not really my wife, Liss. She the wife of my brother. Seeing my confused expression,
he added, This typical Bali, and explained. Ketuts older brother, who is a rice farmer,
lives next door to Ketut and is married to Nyomo. They had three children together. Ketut and
his wife, on the other hand, were unable to have any children at all, so they adopted one of
Ketuts brothers sons in order to have an heir. When Ketuts wife died, Nyomo began living in
both family compounds, splitting her time between the two households, taking care of both
her husband and his brother, and tending to the two families of her children. She is in every
way a wife to Ketut in the Balinese manner (cooking, cleaning, taking care of household religious
ceremonies and rituals) except that they dont have sex together.
Why not? I asked.
Too OLD! he said. Then he called Nyomo over to relay the question to her, to let her
know that the American lady wants to know why they dont have sex with each other. Nyomo
about died laughing at the very thought of it. She came over and punched me in the arm,
hard.
I only had one wife, Ketut went on. And now she dead.
Do you miss her?
A sad smile. It was her time to die. Now I tell you how I find my wife. When I am twentyseven
years, I meet a girl and I love her.
What year was that? I asked, desperate as always to figure out how old he is.
I dont know, he said. Maybe 1920?
(Which would make him about a hundred and twelve by now. I think were getting closer to
solving this . . .)
I love this girl, Liss. Very beautiful. But not good character, this girl. She only want money.
She chase other boy. She never tell truth. I think she had a secret mind inside her other mind,
nobody can see inside there. She stop to loving me, go away with other boy. I am very sad.
Broken in my heart. I pray and pray to my four spirit brothers, ask why she not anymore love
me? Then one of my spirit brothers, he tell me the truth. He say, This is not your true match.
Be patient. So I be patient and then I find my wife. Beautiful woman, good woman. Always
sweet for me. Never once we argue, have always harmony in household, always she smiling.
Even when no money at home, always she smiling and saying how happy she is to see me.
When she die, I very sad in my mind.
Did you cry?
Only little bit, in my eyes. But I do meditation, to clean the body from pain. I meditate for
her soul. Very sad, but happy, too. I visit her in meditation every day, even to kissing her. She
the only woman I ever make sex with. So I do not know . . . what is new word, from today?
Romance?
Yes, romance. I do not know romance, Liss.
So its not really your area of expertise, eh?
What is this, expertise? What this word means?
Eat, Pray, Love

 95


 I finally sat down with Wayan and told her about the money Id raised for her house. I explained
about my birthday wish, showed her the list of all my friends names, and then told her
the final amount which had been raised: Eighteen thousand American dollars. At first she was
shocked to such an extent that her face looked like a mask of grief. It is strange and true that
sometimes intense emotion can cause us to respond to cataclysmic news in exactly the opposite
manner logic might dictate. This is the absolute value of human emotionjoyful events
can sometimes register on the Richter scale as pure trauma; dreadful grief makes us sometimes
burst out laughing. This news I had just handed to Wayan was too much for her to take
in, she almost received it as a cause for sorrow, so I sat there with her for a few hours, telling
her the story repeatedly and showing her the numbers again and again, until the reality began
to sink in.
Her first really articulate response (I mean, even before she burst into tears because she
realized she was going to be able to have a garden) was to urgently say, Please, Liz, you
must explain to everyone who helped raise money that this is not Wayans house. This is the
house of everyone who helped Wayan. If any of these people comes to Bali, they must never
stay in a hotel, OK? You tell them they come and stay at my house, OK? Promise to tell them
that? We call it Group House . . . the House for Everybody . . .
Then she realized about the garden, and started to cry.
Slowly, though, happier realizations come to her. It was like she was a pocketbook shaken
upside down and emotions were spilling all over the place. If she had a home, she could have
a small library, for all her medical books! And a pharmacy for her traditional remedies! And a
proper restaurant with real chairs and tables (because she had to sell all her old good chairs
and tables to pay the divorce lawyer). If she had a home, she could finally be listed in Lonely
Planet, who keep wanting to mention her services, but never can do so, because she never
has a permanent address that they can print. If she had a home, Tutti could have a birthday
party someday!
Then she got very sober and serious again. How can I thank you, Liz? I would give you
anything. If I had husband I loved, and you needed a man, I would give you my husband.
Keep your husband, Wayan. Just make sure Tutti goes to university.
What would I do if you never came here?
But I was always coming here. I thought about one of my favorite Sufi poems, which says
that God long ago drew a circle in the sand exactly around the spot where you are standing
right now. I was never not coming here. This was never not going to happen.
Where are you going to build your new house, Wayan? I asked.
Like a Little Leaguer whos had his eye on a certain baseball glove in the shop window for
ages, or a romantic girl whos been designing her wedding dress since she was thirteen, it
turned out that Wayan already knew exactly the piece of land she would like to buy. It was in
the center of a nearby village, was connected to municipal water and electricity, had a good
school nearby for Tutti, was nicely located in a central place where her patients and customers
could find her on foot. Her brothers could help her build the home, she said. Shed all but
picked out the paint chips for the master bedroom already.
So we went together to visit a nice French expatriate financial adviser and real estate guy,
who was kind enough to suggest the best way to transfer the money. His suggestion was that
I keep it easy and just wire the money directly from my bank account into Wayans bank account
and let her buy whatever land or home she wants, so I dont have to mess around with
owning property in Indonesia. As long as I didnt wire over amounts bigger than $10,000 at a
time, the IRS and CIA wouldnt suspect me of laundering drug money. Then we went to Wayans
little bank, and talked to the manager about how to set up a wire transfer. In neat conclusion,
the bank manager said, So, Wayan. When this wire transfer goes through, in just a few
days, you should have about 180 million rupiah in your bank account.
Wayan and I looked at each other and sparked off into a ridiculous riot of laughter. Such
an enormous sum! We kept trying to pull ourselves together, since we were in some fancy
bankers office, but we couldnt stop laughing. We stumbled out of there like drunks, holding
on to each other to not fall over.
She said, Never have I seen a miracle happen so fast! All this time, I was begging God to
please help Wayan. And God was begging Liz to please help Wayan, too.
I added, And Liz was begging her friends to please help Wayan, too!
We returned to the shop, found Tutti just home from school. Wayan dropped to her knees,
grabbed her girl, and said, A house! A house! We have a house! Tutti executed a fabulous
fake faint, swooning cartoonishly right to the floor.
While we were all laughing, I noticed the two orphans watching this scene from the background
of the kitchen, and I could see them looking at me with something in their faces that
resembled . . . fear. As Wayan and Tutti galloped around in joy, I wondered what the orphans
were thinking. What were they so afraid of? Being left behind, maybe? Or was I now a scary
person to them because Id produced so much money out of nowhere? (Such an unthinkable
amount of money that maybe its like black magic?) Or maybe when youve had such a fragile
life as these kids, any change is a terror.
When there was a lull in the celebration I asked Wayan, just to be sure: What about Big
Ketut and Little Ketut? Is this good news for them, too?
Wayan looked over at the girls in the kitchen and must have seen the same uneasiness I
had seen, because she floated over to them and herded them into her arms and whispered
some reassuring words into the crowns of their heads. They seemed to relax into her. Then
the phone rang, and Wayan tried to pull away from the orphans to answer it, but the skinny
arms of the two Ketuts clung on to their unofficial mother relentlessly, and they buried their
heads in her belly and armpits, and even after the longest time they refusedwith a fierceness
Id never seen in them beforeto let her go.
So I answered the phone, instead.
Balinese Traditional Healing, I said. Stop by today for our giant close-out moving sale!
Eat, Pray, Love

 96


 I went out with Brazilian Felipe again, twice over the weekend. On Saturday I brought him
to meet Wayan and the kids, and Tutti made drawings of houses for him while Wayan winked
suggestively behind his back and mouthed, New boyfriend? and I kept shaking my head,
No, no, no.(Though Ill tell you whatIm not thinking about that cute Welsh guy anymore.) I
also brought Felipe to meet Ketut, my medicine man, and Ketut read his palm and pronounced
my friend, no fewer than seven times (while fixing me with a penetrating stare), to be
a good man, a very good man, a very, very good man. Not a bad man, Lissa good man.
Then on Sunday, Felipe asked me if Id like to spend a day at the beach. It occurred to me
that Id been living here in Bali for two months already and had not yet seen the beach, which
now seemed like sheer idiocy, so I said yes. He picked me up at my house in his jeep and we
drove an hour to this hidden little beach in Pedangbai where hardly any tourists ever go. This
place that he took me to, it was as good an imitation of paradise as anything Id ever seen,
with blue water and white sand and the shade of palm trees. We talked all day, interrupting
our talking only to swim and nap and read, sometimes reading aloud to each other. These
Balinese women in a shack behind the beach grilled us freshly caught fish, and we bought
cold beers and chilled fruit. Dallying in the waves, we told each other whatever was left of the
life story details which we hadnt yet covered in the past few weeks of evenings spent out together
in the quietest restaurants in Ubud, talking over bottles and bottles of wine.
He liked my body, he told me, after the initial viewing at the beach. He told me that Brazilians
have a term for exactly my kind of body (of course they do), which is magra-falsa, translating
as fake thin, meaning that the woman looks slender enough from a distance, but when
you get up close, you can see that shes actually quite round and fleshy, which Brazilians consider
a good thing. God bless Brazilians. As we lay out on our towels talking, he would reach
over sometimes and brush sand off my nose, or push a mutinying hair out of my face. We
talked for about ten solid hours. Then it was dark, so we packed up our things and went for a
walk through the not-very-well-lit dirt road main street of this old Balinese fishing village,
linked comfortably arm-in-arm under the stars. Thats when Felipe from Brazil asked me in the
most natural and relaxed of ways (almost as if he were wondering if we should get a bite to
eat), Should we have an affair together, Liz? What do you think?
I liked everything about the way this was happening. Not with an actionnot with an attempted
kiss or a daring movebut with a question. And the correct question, too. I remembered
something my therapist had said to me over a year ago before Id left on this journey.
Id told her that I thought I wanted to remain celibate for this whole year of traveling, but
worried, What if I meet someone I really like? What should I do? Should I get together with
him or not? Should I maintain my autonomy? Or treat myself to a romance? My therapist
replied with an indulgent smile, You know, Lizall this can be discussed at the time the issue
actually arises, with the person in question.
So here it all wasthe time, the place, the issue and the person in question. We proceeded
to have a discussion about the idea, which came out easily, during our friendly, linked
arm-in-arm walk by the ocean. I said, I would probably say yes, Felipe, under normal circumstances.
Whatever normal circumstances are . . .
We both laughed. But then I showed him my hesitation. Which was thisthat as much as
I might enjoy to have my body and heart folded and unfolded for a while in the expert hands
of an expat lover, something else inside me has put in a serious request that I donate the entirety
of this year of traveling all to myself. That some vital transformation is happening in my
life, and this transformation needs time and room in order to finish its process undisturbed.
That basically, Im the cake that just came out of the oven, and it still needs some more time
to cool before it can be frosted. I dont want to cheat myself out of this precious time. I dont
want to lose control of my life again.
Of course Felipe said that he understood, and that I should do whatevers best for me, and
that he hoped I would forgive him for bringing up the question in the first place. (It had to be
asked, my lovely darling, sooner or later.) He assured me that, whatever I decided, we would
still keep our friendship, since it seemed to be so good for both of us, all this time we spent together.
Although, he went on, you do need to let me make my case now.
Fair enough, I said.
For one thing, if I understand you correctly, this whole year is about your search for balance
between devotion and pleasure. I can see where youve been doing a lot of devotional
practices, but Im not sure where the pleasure has come in so far.
I ate a lot of pasta in Italy, Felipe.
Pasta, Liz? Pasta?
Good point.
For another thing, I think I know what youre worried about. Some man is going to come
into your life and take everything from you again. I wont do that to you, darling. Ive been
alone for a long time, too, and Ive lost a great deal in love, just like you have. I dont want us
to take anything from each other. Its just that Ive never enjoyed anyones company as much
as I enjoy yours, and Id like to be with you. Dont worryIm not going to chase you back to
New York when you leave here in September. And as for all those reasons you told me a few
weeks ago that you didnt want to take a lover . . . Well, think of it this way. I dont care if you
shave your legs every day, I already love your body, youve already told me your entire life
story and you dont have to worry about birth controlIve had a vasectomy.
Felipe, I said, thats the most appealing and romantic offer a man has ever made me.
And it was. But still I said no.
He drove me home. Parked in front of my house, we shared a few sweet, salty, sandy
day-at-the-ocean kisses. It was lovely. Of course it was lovely. But still, and again, I said no.
Thats fine, darling, he said. But come over to my house tomorrow night for dinner, and
Ill make you a steak.
Then he drove off and I went to bed alone.
I have a history of making decisions very quickly about men. I have always fallen in love
fast and without measuring risks. I have a tendency not only to see the best in everyone, but
to assume that everyone is emotionally capable of reaching his highest potential. I have fallen
in love more times than I care to count with the highest potential of a man, rather than with the
man himself, and then I have hung on to the relationship for a long time (sometimes far too
long) waiting for the man to ascend to his own greatness. Many times in romance I have been
a victim of my own optimism.
I married young and quick, from a place of love and hope, but without a lot of discussion
over what the realities of marriage would mean. Nobody advised me on my marriage. I had
been raised by my parents to be independent, self-providing, self-deciding. By the time I
reached the age of twenty-four, it was assumed by everyone that I could make all my own
choices, autonomously. Of course the world was not always like this. If Id been born during
any other century of Western patriarchy, I wouldve been considered the property of my father,
until which time he passed me over to my husband, to become marital property. I wouldve
had precious little say in the major matters of my own life. At one time in history, if a man had
been my suitor, my father might have sat that man down with a long list of questions to establish
whether this would be an appropriate match. He would have wanted to know, How will
you provide for my daughter? What is your reputation in this community? How is your health?
Where will you take her to live? What are your debts and your assets? What are the strengths
of your character? My father would not have just given me away in marriage to anybody for
the mere fact that I was in love with the fellow. But in modern life, when I made the decision to
marry, my modern father didnt become involved at all. He would have no more interfered with
that decision than he would have told me how to style my hair.
I have no nostalgia for the patriarchy, please believe me. But what I have come to realize
is that, when that patriarchic system was (rightfully) dismantled, it was not necessarily replaced
by another form of protection. What I mean isI never thought to ask a suitor the
same challenging questions my father might have asked him, in a different age. I have given
myself away in love many times, merely for the sake of love. And Ive given away the farm
sometimes in that process. If I am to truly become an autonomous woman, then I must take
over that role of being my own guardian. Famously, Gloria Steinem once advised women that
they should strive to become like the men they had always wanted to marry. What Ive only
recently realized is that I not only have to become my own husband, but I need to be my own
father, too. And this is why I sent myself to bed that night alone. Because I felt it was too soon
for me to be receiving a gentleman suitor.
That said, I woke up at 2:00 AM with a heavy sigh and a physical hunger so deep I didnt
have any idea of how to satisfy it. The lunatic cat who lives in my house was howling mournfully
for some reason and I told him, I know exactly how you feel. I had to do something
about my longing, so I got up, went to the kitchen in my nightgown, peeled a pound of potatoes,
boiled them up, sliced them, fried them in butter, salted them generously and ate every
bite of themasking my body the whole while if it would please accept the satisfaction of a
pound of fried potatoes in lieu of the fulfillment of lovemaking.
My body replied, only after eating every bite of the food: No deal, babe.
So I climbed back into bed, sighed in boredom and commenced to . . .
Well. A word about masturbation, if I may. Sometimes it can be a handy (forgive me) tool,
but other times it can be so acutely unsatisfying that it only makes you feel worse in the end.
After a year and half of celibacy, after a year and a half of calling my own name in my bedbuilt-for-one,
I was getting a little sick of the sport. Still, tonight, in my restless statewhat
else could I do? The potatoes hadnt worked. So I had my way with myself yet again. As usual,
my mind paged through its backlog of erotic files, looking for the right fantasy or memory
that would help get the job done fastest. But nothing was really working tonightnot the firemen,
not the pirates, not that pervy old Bill Clinton standby scene that usually does the trick,
not even the Victorian gentlemen crowding around me in their drawing room with their task
force of nubile young maids. In the end, the only thing that would satisfy was when I reluctantly
admitted into my mind the idea of my good friend from Brazil climbing into this bed with
me . . . on me . . .
Then I slept. I woke to a quiet blue sky and an even quieter bedroom. Still feeling unsettled
and unbalanced, I took a long stretch of my morning and chanted the entire 182
Sanskrit verses of the Gurugitathe great, purifying fundamental hymn of my Ashram in In-
dia. Then I meditated for an hour of bone-tingling stillness until I finally felt it againthat specific,
constant, clear-sky, unrelated-to-anything, never-shifting, nameless and changeless perfection
of my own happiness. That happiness which is better, truly, than anything I have ever
experienced anywhere else on this earth, and that includes salty, buttery kisses and even
saltier and more buttery potatoes.
I was so glad I had made the decision to stay alone.
Eat, Pray, Love

 97


 So I was kind of surprised the next night whenafter hed made me dinner at his house
and after wed sprawled on his couch for several hours and discussed all manner of subjects
and after hed unexpectedly leaned into me for a moment and sunk his face toward my armpit
and pronounced how much he loved the marvelous dirty stink of meFelipe finally put his
palm against my cheek and said, Thats enough, darling. Come to my bed now, and I did.
Yes, I did come to his bed with him, in that bedroom with its big open windows looking out
over the nighttime and the quiet Balinese rice fields. He parted the sheer, white curtain of
mosquito netting that surrounded his bed and guided me in there. Then he helped me out of
my dress with the tender competence of a man who had obviously spent many comfortable
years getting his children ready for bathtime, and he explained to me his termsthat he
wanted absolutely nothing from me whatsoever except permission to adore me for as long as
I wanted him to. Were those terms acceptable to me?
Having lost my voice somewhere between the couch and the bed, I only nodded. There
was nothing left to say. It had been a long, austere season of solitude. I had done well for myself.
But Felipe was rightthat was enough.
OK, he replied, smiling as he moved some pillows out of our way and rolled my body under
his. Lets get ourselves organized here.
Which was actually pretty funny because that moment marked an end to all my efforts at
organization.
Later, Felipe would tell me how he had seen me that night. He said that I seemed so
young, not in the least bit resembling the self-assured woman hed come to know in the daylight
world. He said I seemed terribly young but also open and excited and relieved to be recognized
and so tired of being brave. He said it was obvious I hadnt been touched in such a
long time. He found me teeming with need but also grateful to be allowed to express that
need. And while I cant say that I remember all that, I do take his word for it because he
seemed to be paying awfully close attention to me.
What I mostly remember about that night is the billowy white mosquito netting that surrounded
us. How it looked to me like a parachute. And how I felt like I was now deploying this
parachute to escort me out the side exit of the solid, disciplined airplane which had been flying
me during these few years out of A Very Hard Time in My Life. But now my sturdy flying
machine had become obsolete right there in midair, so I stepped out of that single-minded
single-engine airplane and let this fluttering white parachute swing me down through the
strange empty atmosphere between my past and my future, and land me safely on this small,
bed-shaped island, inhabited only by this handsome shipwrecked Brazilian sailor, who
(having been alone himself for far too long) was so happy and so surprised to see me coming
that he suddenly forgot all his English and could only manage to repeat these five words
every time he looked at my face: beautiful, beautiful, beautiful, beautiful and beautiful.
Eat, Pray, Love

 98


 We didnt sleep at all, of course. And then, it was ridiculousI had to go. I had to go back
to my house stupidly early the next morning because I had a date to meet my friend Yudhi.
He and I had long ago planned that this was the very week we were going to leave on a big
cross-Balinese road trip together. This was an idea wed come up with one evening at my
house when Yudhi said that, aside from his wife and Manhattan, what he most missed about
America was drivingjust taking off with a car and some friends and going on an adventure
across those great distances, on all those fabulous interstate highways. I told him, OK, so
well go on a road trip here in Bali together, American-style.
This had struck us both as irresistibly comictheres no way you can do an American-style
road trip in Bali. There are no great distances, first of all, on an island the size of
Delaware. And the highways are horrible, made surreally dangerous by the dense, mad prevalence
of Balis version of the American family minivana small motorcycle with five people
crowded on it, the father driving with one hand while holding the newborn infant with the other
(football-like) while Mom sits sidesaddle behind him in her tight sarong with a basket balanced
on her head, encouraging her twin toddlers not to fall off the speeding motorbike, which is
probably traveling on the wrong side of the road and has no headlight. Helmets are rarely
worn but are frequentlyand I never did find out whycarried. Imagine scores of these heavily
laden motorcycles, all speeding recklessly, all weaving and dodging across each other like
some kind of crazy motorized maypole dance, and you have life on the Balinese highways. I
dont know why every single Balinese person hasnt been killed already in a road accident.
But Yudhi and I decided to do it anyway, to take off for a week, rent a car and drive all
over this tiny island, pretending that we are in America and that both of us are free. The idea
charmed me when we came up with it last month, but the timing of it nowas I am lying in
bed with Felipe and hes kissing my fingertips and forearms and shoulders, encouraging me
to lingerseems unfortunate. But I have to go. And in a way, I do want to go. Not only to
spend a week with my friend Yudhi, but also as a repose after my big night with Felipe, to get
my head around the new reality that, as they say in the novels: I have taken a lover.
So Felipe drops me off at my house with one last passionate embrace and I have just
enough time to shower and pull myself together when Yudhi arrives with our rental car. He
takes one look at me and says, Dudewhat timed you get home last night?
I say, DudeI didnt get home last night.
He says, Duuuuuuude, and starts laughing, probably remembering the conversation
wed had only about two weeks earlier wherein Id seriously posited that I might never, actually,
have sex again for the rest of my life, ever. He says, So you gave in, huh?
Yudhi, I replied, let me tell you a story. Last summer, right before I left the States, I went
to visit my grandparents in upstate New York. My grandfathers wifehis second wifeis this
really nice lady named Gale, in her eighties now. She hauled out this old photo album and
showed me pictures from the 1930s, when she was eighteen years old and went on a trip to
Europe for a year with her two best friends and a guardian. Shes flipping through these
pages, showing me these amazing old photographs of Italy, and suddenly we get to this picture
of this really cute young Italian guy, in Venice. I go, Galewhos the hottie? She goes,
Thats the son of the people who owned the hotel where we stayed in Venice. He was my
boyfriend. I go, Your boyfriend? And my grandfathers sweet wife looks at me all sly and her
eyes get all sexy like Bette Davis, and she goes, I was tired of looking at churches, Liz. 
Yudhi gives me a high five. Rock on, dude.
We set off for our fake American road trip across Bali, me and this cool young Indonesian
musical genius in exile, the back of our car filled with guitars and beer and the Balinese equivalent
of American road trip foodfried rice crackers and dreadfully flavored indigenous candies.
The details of our journey are a bit blurry to me now, smudged over my distracting
thoughts of Felipe and by the weird haziness that always accompanies a road trip in any
country of the world. What I do remember is that Yudhi and I speak American the entire
timea language I hadnt spoken in so long. Id been speaking English a lot during this year,
of course, but not American, and definitely not the sort of hip-hop American Yudhi likes. So
we just indulge it, turning ourselves into MTV-watching adolescents as we drive along, razzing
each other like teenagers in Hoboken, calling each other dude and man and sometimeswith
great tendernesshomo. A lot of our dialogue revolves around affectionate insults
to each others mothers.
Dude, whatd you do with the map?
Why dont you ask your mother what I did with the map?
I would, man, but shes too fat.
And so forth.
We dont even penetrate the interior of Bali; we just drive along the coast, and its
beaches, beaches, beaches for a whole week. Sometimes we take a little fishing boat out to
an island, see whats going on out there. There are so many kinds of beaches in Bali. We
hang out one day along the long southern Californiastyle groovy white sand surf of Kuta,
then head up to the sinister black rocky beauty of the west coast, then we pass that invisible
Balinese dividing line over which regular tourists never seem to go, up to the wild beaches of
the north coast where only the surfers dare to tread (and only the crazy ones, at that). We sit
on the beach and watch the dangerous waves, watch the lean brown and white Indonesian
and Western surf-cats slice across the water like zippers ripping open the backs of the
oceans blue party dress. We watch the surfers wipe out with bone-breaking hubris against
the coral and rocks, only to go back out again to surf another wave, and we gasp and say,
Dude, that is totally MESSED UP.
Just as intended, we forget for long hours (purely for Yudhis benefit) that we are in Indonesia
at all as we tool around in this rented car, eating junk food and singing American
songs, having pizza everywhere we can find it. When we are overcome by evidence of the
Bali-ness of our surroundings, we try to ignore it and pretend were back in America. Ill ask,
Whats the best route to get past this volcano? and Yudhi will say, I think we should take I-
95, and Ill counter, But thatll take us right through Boston in the middle of rush-hour traffic .
. . Its just a game, but it sort of works.
Sometimes we discover calm stretches of blue ocean and we swim all day, permitting
each other to start drinking beer at 10:00 AM (Dudeits medicinal). We make friends with
everyone we encounter. Yudhi is the kind of guy whowhen hes walking down the beach
and he sees a man building a boatwill stop and say, Wow! Are you building a boat? And
his curiosity is so perfectly winning that the next thing you know weve been invited to come
live with the boat-builders family for a year.
Weird things happen in the evenings. We stumble on mysterious temple rituals in the
middle of nowhere, let ourselves get hypnotized by the chorus of voices, drums and gamelan.
We find one small seaside town where all the locals have gathered in a darkened street for a
birthday ceremony; Yudhi and I are both pulled out of the crowd (honored strangers) and invited
to dance with the prettiest girl in the village. (Shes enveloped in gold and jewels and incense
and Egyptian-looking makeup; shes probably thirteen years old but moves her hips
with the soft, sensual faith of a creature who knows she could seduce any god she wanted.)
The next day we find a strange family restaurant in the same village where the Balinese proprietor
announces that hes a great chef of Thai food, which he decidedly is not, but we spend
the whole day there anyhow, drinking icy Cokes and eating greasy pad thai and playing Milton
Bradley board games with the owners elegantly effeminate teenage son. (It occurs to us only
later that this pretty teenage boy could well have been the beautiful female dancer from the
night before; the Balinese are masters of ritual transvestism.)
Every day I call Felipe from whatever outback phone I can find, and he asks, How many
more sleeps until you come back to me? He tells me, Im enjoying falling in love with you,
darling. It feels so natural, like its something I experience every second week, but actually I
havent felt this way about anyone in nearly thirty years.
Not there yet, not yet to that place of a free fall into love, I make hesitant noises, little reminders
that I am leaving in a few months. Felipe is unconcerned. He says, Maybe this is just
some stupid romantic South American idea, but I need you to understanddarling, for you, I
am even willing to suffer. Whatever pain happens to us in the future, I accept it already, just
for the pleasure of being with you now. Lets enjoy this time. Its marvelous.
I tell him, You knowits funny, but Id been seriously thinking before I met you that I
might be alone and celibate forever. I was thinking maybe I would live the life of a spiritual
contemplative.
He says, Contemplate this, darling . . . , and then proceeds to detail with careful specificity
the first, second, third, fourth and fifth things he is planning to do with my body when
he gets me alone in his bed again. I wobble away from the phone call a little woozy in the
knees, amused and bamboozled by all this new passion.
The last day of our road trip, Yudhi and I lounge on a beach someplace for hours, andas
often happens with uswe start talking about New York City again, how great it is, how much
we love it. Yudhi misses the city, he says, almost as much as he misses his wifeas if New
York is a person, a relative, whom he has lost since he got deported. As were talking, Yudhi
brushes off a nice clean patch of white sand between our towels and draws a map of Manhattan.
He says, Lets try to fill in everything we can remember about the city. We use our fingertips
to draw in all the avenues, the major cross-streets, the mess that Broadway makes as
it leans crookedly across the island, the rivers, the Village, Central Park. We choose a thin,
pretty seashell to stand for the Empire State Building, and another shell is the Chrysler Building.
Out of respect, we take two sticks and put the Twin Towers back at the base of the island,
back where they belong.
We use this sandy map to show each other our favorite spots in New York. This is where
Yudhi bought the sunglasses hes wearing right now; this is where I bought the sandals Im
wearing. This is where I first had dinner with my ex-husband; this is where Yudhi met his wife.
This is the best Vietnamese food in the city, this is the best bagel, this is the best noodle shop
(No way, homothis is the best noodle shop). I sketch out my old Hells Kitchen neighborhood
and Yudhi says, I know a good diner up there.
Tick-Tock, Cheyenne or Starlight? I ask.
Tick-Tock, dude.
Ever try the egg creams at Tick-Tock?
He moans, Oh my God, I know . . .
I feel his longing for New York so deeply that for a moment I mistake it for my own. His
homesickness infects me so completely that I forget for an instant that I am actually free to go
back to Manhattan someday, though he is not. He fiddles a bit with the two sticks of the Twin
Towers, anchors them more solidly in the sand, then looks out at the hushed, blue ocean and
says, I know its beautiful here . . . but do you think Ill ever see America again?
What can I tell him?
We slump into silence. Then he pops out of his mouth the yucky Indonesian hard candy
hes been sucking on for the last hour and says, Dude, this candy tastes like ass. Whered
you get it?
From your mother, dude, I say. From your mother.
Eat, Pray, Love

 99


 When we return to Ubud, I go straight back to Felipes house and dont leave his bedroom
for approximately another month. This is only the faintest of exaggerations. I have never been
loved and adored like this before by anyone, never with such pleasure and single-minded
concentration. Never have I been so unpeeled, revealed, unfurled and hurled through the
event of lovemaking.
One thing I do know about intimacy is that there are certain natural laws which govern the
sexual experience of two people, and that these laws cannot be budged any more than gravity
can be negotiated with. To feel physically comfortable with someone elses body is not a
decision you can make. It has very little to do with how two people think or act or talk or even
look. The mysterious magnet is either there, buried somewhere deep behind the sternum, or it
is not. When it isnt there (as I have learned in the past, with heartbreaking clarity) you can no
more force it to exist than a surgeon can force a patients body to accept a kidney from the
wrong donor. My friend Annie says it all comes down to one simple question: Do you want
your belly pressed against this persons belly foreveror not?
Felipe and I, as we discover to our delight, are a perfectly matched, genetically engineered
belly-to-belly success story. There are no parts of our bodies which are in any way allergic
to any parts of the others body. Nothing is dangerous, nothing is difficult, nothing is refused.
Everything in our sensual universe issimply and thoroughlycomplemented. And,
also . . . complimented.
Look at you, Felipe says, taking me to the mirror after weve made love again, showing
me my nude body and my hair that looks like I just came through a NASA space-training centrifuge.
He says, Look how beautiful you are . . . every line of you is a curve . . . you look like
sand dunes . . .
(Indeed, I do not think my body has looked or felt this relaxed in its life, not since I was
maybe six months old and my mother took snapshots of me all blissed-out on a towel on the
kitchen counter after a nice bath in the kitchen sink.)
And then he leads me back to the bed, saying, in Portuguese, Vem, gostosa.
Come here, my delicious one.
Felipe is also the endearment master. In bed he slips into adoring me in Portuguese, so I
have graduated from being his lovely little darling to being his queridinha. (Literal translation:
lovely little darling.) Ive been too lazy here in Bali to try to learn Indonesian or Balinese, but
suddenly Portuguese is coming easily to me. Of course Im only learning the pillow talk, but
thats a fine use of Portuguese. He says, Darling, youre going to get sick of it. Youre going
to get bored of how much I touch you, and how many times a day I tell you how beautiful you
are.
 Try me, mister.

Im losing days here, disappearing under his sheets, under his hands. I like the feeling of
not knowing what the date is. My nice organized schedule has been blown away by the
breeze. I finally do stop by to see my medicine man one afternoon after a long hiatus of no
visiting. Ketut sees the truth on my face before I say a word.
You found boyfriend in Bali, he says.
Yes, Ketut.
Good. Be careful not get pregnant.
I will.
He good man?
You tell me, Ketut, I said. You read his palm. You promised that he was a good man.
You said it about seven times.
I did? When?
Back in June. I brought him here. He was the Brazilian man, older than me. You told me
you liked him.
Never did, he insisted, and there was nothing I could do to convince him otherwise.
Sometimes Ketut loses things from his recollection, as you would, too, if you were somewhere
between sixty-five and a hundred and twelve years old. Most of the time hes keen and sharp,
but other times I feel like Ive disturbed him out of some other plane of consciousness, out of
some other universe. (A few weeks ago he said to me, completely out of nowhere, You good
friend to me, Liss. Loyal friend. Loving friend. Then he sighed, stared off into space and added
mournfully, Not like Sharon. Who the hell is Sharon? What did she do to him? When I
tried asking him about it, he would give me no answer. Acted suddenly like he didnt know
who I was even referring to. As if I were the one whod brought up that thieving hussy Sharon
in the first place.)
Why you never bring boyfriend here to meet me? he asked now.
I did, Ketut. Really I did. And you told me you liked him.
Dont remember. He a rich man, your boyfriend?
No, Ketut. Hes not a rich man. But he has enough money.
Medium rich? The medicine man wants details, spreadsheets.
He has enough money.
My answer seemed to irritate Ketut. You ask this man for money, he can give to you, or
not?
Ketut, I dont want money from him. Ive never taken money from a man.
You spend every night with him?
Yes.
Good. He spoil you?
Very much.
Good. You still meditate?
Yes, I do still meditate every day of the week, slithering out of Felipes bed and over to the
couch, where I can sit in silence and offer up some gratitude for all of this. Outside his porch,
the ducks quack their way through the rice paddies, gossiping and splashing all over the
place. (Felipe says that these flocks of busy Balinese ducks have always reminded him of
Brazilian women strutting down the beaches in Rio; chatting loudly and interrupting each other
constantly and waggling their bottoms with such pride.) I am so relaxed now that I kind of
slide into meditation like its a bath prepared by my lover. Naked in the morning sun, with
nothing but a light blanket wrapped over my shoulders, I disappear into grace, hovering over
the void like a tiny seashell balanced on a teaspoon.
 Why did life ever seem difficult?

I call my friend Susan back in New York City one day, and listen as she confides to me,
over the typical urban police sirens wailing in the background, the latest details of her latest
broken heart. My voice comes out in the cool, smooth tones of a late-nite, jazz-radio DJ, as I
tell her how she just has to let go, man, how shes gotta learn that everything is just perfect as
it is already, that the universe provides, baby, that its all peace and harmony out there . . .
I can almost hear her rolling her eyes as she says over the sirens, Spoken like a woman
who already had four orgasms today.
Eat, Pray, Love

 100


 But all the fun and games caught up with me after a few weeks. After all those nights of not
sleeping and all those days of too much lovemaking, my body struck back and I got attacked
by a nasty infection in my bladder. A typical affliction of the overly sexed, especially likely to
strike when youre not used to being overly sexed anymore. It came up as fast as any tragedy
can strike. I was walking through town one morning doing some chores when suddenly I was
buckled over with burning pain and fever. Id had these infections before, during my wayward
youth, so I knew what it was. I panicked for a momentthese things can be awfulbut then
thought, Thank God my best friend in Bali is a healer, and I ran into Wayans shop.
Im sick! I said.
She took one look at me and said, You sick from making too much sex, Liz.
I groaned, buried my face in my hands, embarrassed.
She chuckled, said, You cant keep secrets from Wayan . . .
I was in godawful pain. Anyone whos ever had this infection knows the dreadful feeling;
anyone who hasnt experienced this specific sufferingwell, just make up your own torturous
metaphor, preferably using the term fire poker someplace in the sentence.
Wayan, like a veteran firefighter or an ER surgeon, never moves fast. She methodically
started chopping some herbs, boiling some roots, wandering back and forth between her kitchen
and me, bringing me one warm, brown, toxic-tasting concoction after another, saying,
Drink, honey . . .
Whenever the next batch boiled, she would sit across from me, giving me sly, dirty looks
and using the opportunity to get nosy.
You careful not to get pregnant, Liz?
Not possible, Wayan. Felipe has a vasectomy.
Felipe has a vasectomy? she asked, in as much awe as if she were asking, Felipe has
a villa in Tuscany? (I feel the same way about it, by the way.) Very difficult in Bali to get a
man to do this. Always the woman problem, birth control.
(Although it is true that the Indonesian birth rates are down lately due to a brilliant recent
birth control incentive program: the government promised a new motorcycle to every man
who would volunteer to come in for a vasectomy . . . though I hate to think the guys had to
ride their new bikes home the same day.)
Sex is funny, Wayan mused as she watched me grimacing in pain, drinking more of her
homemade medicine.
Yeah, Wayan, thanks. Its hilarious.
No, sex is funny, she went on. Make people do funny things. Everyone gets like this, at
the beginning of love. Wanting too much happiness, too much pleasure, until you make yourself
sick. Even to Wayan this happens at beginning of love story. Lose balance.
Im embarrassed, I say.
Dont, she said. Then she added in perfect English (and perfect Balinese logic), To lose
balance sometimes for love is part of living a balanced life.
I decided to call Felipe. I had some antibiotics at the house, an emergency stash I always
travel with, just in case. Having had these infections before, I know how bad they can get,
even traveling up into your kidneys. I didnt want to go through that, not in Indonesia. So I
called him and told him what had happened (he was mortified) and asked him to bring me
over the pills. It wasnt that I didnt trust Wayans healing prowess, its just that this was really
serious pain . . .
She said, You dont need Western pills.
But maybe its better, just to be safe . . .
Give two hours, she said. If I dont make you better, you can take your pills.
Reluctantly, I agreed. My experience with these infections is that they can take days to
clear, even with strong antibiotics. But I didnt want to make her feel bad.
Tutti was playing in the shop and she kept bringing little drawings of houses over to cheer
me up, patting my hand with an eight-year-olds compassion. Mama Elizabeth sick? At least
she didnt know what Id been doing to get sick.
Did you buy your house yet, Wayan? I asked.
Not yet, honey. No hurry.
What about that place you liked? I thought you were going to buy that?
Found out not for sale. Too expensive.
Do you have any other places in mind?
Not worry about it now, Liz. For now, let me make you quickly feel better.
Felipe arrived with my medicine and a face full of remorse, apologizing to both me and
Wayan for having inflicted me with this pain, or at least thats how he was seeing it.
Not serious, said Wayan. Not worry. I fix her soon. Quickly better.
Then she went into the kitchen and produced a giant glass mixing bowl full of leaves,
roots, berries, something I recognized as turmeric, some shaggy mass of something that
looked like witches hair, plus eye of what I believe might have been newt . . . all floating in its
own brown juice. There was about a gallon of it in the bowl, whatever it was. It stank like a
corpse.
Drink, honey, Wayan said. Drink all.
I suffered it down. And in less than two hours . . . well, we all know how the story ends. In
less than two hours I was fine, totally healed. An infection that would have taken days to treat
with Western antibiotics was gone. I tried to pay her for having fixed me up, but she only
laughed. My sister doesnt need to pay. Then she turned on Felipe, fake stern: You be
careful with her now. Only sleep tonight, no touching.
Youre not embarrassed to fix people for problems like this, from sex? I asked Wayan.
LizIm healer. I fix all problems, with womens vaginas, with mens bananas. Sometimes
for women, I even make fake penises. For making sex alone.
Dildos? I asked, shocked.
Not everyone has Brazilian boyfriend, Liz, she admonished. Then she looked at Felipe
and said brightly, If you ever need help making stiff your banana, I can give you medicine.
I was busily assuring Wayan that Felipe needed not one bit of help with his banana, but he
interrupted mealways the entrepreneurto ask Wayan if this banana-stiffening therapy of
hers could perhaps be bottled and marketed. We could make a fortune, he said. But she explained,
no, its not like that. All her medicines must be made fresh each day in order to work.
And they must be accompanied by her prayers. Anyway, internal medicine is not the only way
Wayan can firm up a mans banana, she assured us; she can also do this with massage.
Then, to our lurid fascination, she described the different massages she does for mens impotent
bananas, how she grips around the base of the thing and kind of shakes it around for
about an hour to encourage the blood to flow, while incanting special prayers.
I asked, But Wayanwhat happens when the man comes back every day and says, Still
not cured, Doctor! Need another banana massage!  She laughed at this bawdy idea, and admitted
that, yes, she has to be careful not to spend too much time fixing mens bananas because
it causes a certain amount of . . . strong feeling . . . within her, which she isnt sure is
good for the healing energy. And sometimes, yes, the men get out of control. (As you would,
too, if youd been impotent for years and suddenly this beautiful mahogany-skinned woman
with long black silky hair gets the engine to turn over again.) She told us about the one man
who leapt up and started chasing her around the room during an impotency cure, saying: I
need Wayan! I need Wayan!
But thats not all Wayan can do. Also, she told us, she is sometimes called upon to be a
teacher of sex for a couple who are either struggling with impotence or frigidity, or who are
having trouble making a baby. She has to draw magic pictures on their bedsheets and explain
to them which sexual positions are appropriate for which time of the month. She said that if a
man wants to make a baby he should make intercourse with his wife really, really hard and
should shoot water out from his banana into her vagina really, really fast. Sometimes Wayan
has to actually be there in the room with the copulating couple, explaining just how hard and
fast this must be done.
I ask, And is the man able to shoot water out of his banana really hard and really fast with
Dr. Wayan standing over him watching?
Felipe imitates Wayan watching the couple: Faster! Harder! You want this baby or not?
Wayan says, yes, she knows its crazy, but this is the job of the healer. Though she admits
it requires a whole lot of purification ceremonies before and after this event in order to keep
her sacred spirit intact, and she doesnt like to do it very often because it makes her feel
funny. But if a baby needs to be conceived, she will take care of it.
And do these couples all have babies now? I asked.
Have babies! she confirmed with pride. Of course they do.
But then Wayan confides something extremely interesting. She said that if a couple is not
having any luck conceiving a child, she will examine both the man and the woman to determine
who is, as they say, to blame. If its the woman, no problemWayan can fix this with ancient
healing techniques. But if its the manwell, this presents a delicate situation here in the
patriarchy of Bali. Wayans medical options here are limited because it is beyond the pale of
safety to inform a Balinese man that he is sterile; it cannot possibly be true. Men are men,
after all. If no pregnancy is occurring, it has to be the womans fault. And if the woman doesnt
provide her husband with a baby soon, she could be in big troublebeaten, shamed or divorced.

So what do you do in that situation? I asked, impressed that a woman who still calls semen
banana water could diagnose male infertility.
Wayan told us all. What she does in the case of male infertility is to inform the man that
his wife is infertile and needs to be seen privately every afternoon for healing sessions.
When the wife comes to the shop alone, Wayan calls some young stud from the village to
come over and have sex with her, hopefully creating a baby.
Felipe was appalled: Wayan! No!
But she just calmly nodded. Yes. Its the only way. If the wife is healthy, she will have
baby. Then everybody happy.
Felipe immediately wanted to know, since he lives in this town, Who? Who do you hire to
do this job?
Wayan said, The drivers.
Which made us all laugh because Ubud is full of these young guys, these drivers, who
sit on every corner and harass passing tourists with the never-ending sales pitch, Transport?
Transport? trying to make a buck driving folks out of town to the volcanoes, the beaches or
the temples. Generally speaking, this is a fairly good-looking crowd, what with their fine
Gauguin skin, toned bodies and groovy long hair. You could make a nice bit of money in
America operating a fertility clinic for women, staffed with beautiful guys like this. Wayan
says the best thing about her infertility treatment is that the drivers generally dont even ask
any payment for their sexual transport services, especially if the wife is really cute. Felipe and
I agree that this is quite generous and community-spirited of the fellows. Nine months later a
beautiful baby is born. And everyone is happy. Best of all: No need to cancel the marriage.
And we all know how horrible it is to cancel a marriage, especially in Bali.
Felipe said, My Godwhat suckers we men are.
But Wayan is unapologetic. This treatment is only necessary because its not possible to
tell a Balinese man that he is infertile without risking that he will go home and do something
terrible to his wife. If men in Bali werent like this, she could cure their infertility in other ways.
But this is the reality of the culture, so there it is. She doesnt have the tiniest shred of bad
conscience about it but thinks its just another way of being a creative healer. Anyway, she
adds, its sometimes nice for the wife to make sex with one of those cool drivers, because
most husbands in Bali dont know how to make love to a woman, anyway.
Most husbands, its like roosters, like goats.
I suggested, Maybe you should teach sex education class, Wayan. You could teach men
how to touch women in a soft way, then maybe their wives would like sex more. Because if a
man really touches you gently, caresses your skin, says loving things, kisses you all over your
body, takes his time . . . sex can be nice.
Suddenly she blushed. Wayan Nuriyasih, this banana-massaging, bladder-infection-treating,
dildo-peddling, small-time-pimp, actually blushed.
You make me feel funny when you talk like that, she said, fanning herself. This talking, it
makes me feel . . . different. Even in my underpants I feel different! Go home now, you both.
No more talk like this about sex. Go home, go to bed, but only sleeping, OK? Only SLEEPING!

Eat, Pray, Love

 101


 On the ride home Felipe asked, Has she bought a house yet?
Not yet. But she says shes looking.
Its been over a month already since you gave her the money, hasnt it?
Yeah, but the place she wanted, it wasnt for sale . . .
Be careful, darling, Felipe said. Dont let this drag out too long. Dont let this situation
get all Balinese on you.
What does that mean?
Im not trying to interfere in your business, but Ive lived in this country for five years and I
know how things are. Stories can get complicated around here. Sometimes its hard to get to
the truth of whats actually happening.
What are you trying to say, Felipe? I asked, and when he didnt answer immediately, I
quoted to him one of his own signature lines: If you tell me slowly, I can understand quickly.
What Im trying to say, Liz, is that your friends have raised an awful lot of money for this
woman, and right now its all sitting in Wayans bank account. Make sure she actually buys a
house with it.
Eat, Pray, Love

 102


 The end of July came, and my thirty-fifth birthday with it. Wayan threw a birthday party for
me in her shop, quite unlike any I have ever experienced before. Wayan had dressed me in a
traditional Balinese birthday suita bright purple sarong, a strapless bustier and a long length
of golden fabric that she wrapped tightly around my torso, forming a sheath so snug I could
barely take a breath or eat my own birthday cake. As she was mummifying me into this exquisite
costume in her tiny, dark bedroom (crowded with the belongings of the three other little
human beings who live there with her), she asked, not quite looking at me, but doing some
fancy tucking and pinning of material around my ribs, You have prospect to marrying Felipe?
No, I said. We have no prospects for marrying. I dont want any more husbands, Wayan.
And I dont think Felipe wants any more wives. But I like being with him.
Handsome on the outside is easy to find, but handsome on the outside and handsome on
the insidethis not easy. Felipe has this.
I agreed.
She smiled. And who bring this good man to you, Liz? Who prayed every day for this
man?
I kissed her. Thank you, Wayan. You did a good job.
We commenced to the birthday party. Wayan and the kids had decorated the whole place
with balloons and palm fronds and handwritten signs with complex, run-on messages like,
Happy birthday to a nice and sweet heart, to you, our dearest sister, to our beloved Lady
Elizabeth, Happy Birthday to you, always peace to you and Happy Birthday. Wayan has a
brother whose young children are gifted dancers in temple ceremonies, and so the nieces and
nephews came and danced for me right there in the restaurant, staging a haunting, gorgeous
performance usually offered only to priests. All the children were decked out in gold and
massive headdresses, decorated in fierce drag queen makeup, with powerful stamping feet
and graceful, feminine fingers.
Balinese parties as a whole are generally organized around the principle of people getting
dressed up in their finest clothes, then sitting around and staring at each other. Its a lot like
magazine parties in New York, actually.(My God, darling, moaned Felipe, when I told him
that Wayan was throwing me a Balinese birthday party, its going to be so boring . . .) It
wasnt boring, thoughjust quiet. And different. There was the whole dressing-up part, and
then there was the whole dance performance part, and then there was the whole sitting
around and staring at each other part, which wasnt so bad. Everyone did look lovely. Wayans
whole family had come, and they kept smiling and waving at me from four feet away, and
I kept smiling at them and waving back at them.
I blew out the candles of the birthday cake along with Little Ketut, the smallest orphan,
whose birthday, I had decided a few weeks ago, would also be on July 18 from now on,
shared with my own, since shed never had a birthday or a birthday party before. After we
blew out the candles, Felipe presented Little Ketut with a Barbie doll, which she unwrapped in
stunned wonder and then regarded as though it were a ticket for a rocket ship to
Jupitersomething she never, ever in seven billion light-years couldve imagined receiving.
Everything about this party was kind of funny. It was an oddball international and intergenerational
mix of a handful of my friends, Wayans family and some of her Western clients and
patients whom Id never met before. My friend Yudhi brought me a six-pack of beer to wish
me happy birthday, and also this cool young hipster screenwriter from L.A. named Adam
came by. Felipe and I had met Adam in a bar the other night and had invited him. Adam and
Yudhi passed their time at the party talking to a little boy named John, whose mother is a patient
of Wayans, a German clothing designer married to an American who lives in Bali. Little
Johnwho is seven years old and who is kind of American, he says, because of his American
dad (even though he himself has never been there), but who speaks German with his
mother and speaks Indonesian with Wayans childrenwas smitten with Adam because hed
found out that the guy was from California and could surf.
Whats your favorite animal, mister? asked John, and Adam replied, Pelicans.
Whats a pelican? the little boy asked, and Yudhi jumped in and said, Dude, you dont
know what a pelican is? Dude, you gotta go home and ask your dad about that. Pelicans rock,
dude.
Then John, the kind-of-American boy, turned to say something in Indonesian to little Tutti
(probably to ask her what a pelican was) as Tutti sat in Felipes lap trying to read my birthday
cards, while Felipe was speaking beautiful French to a retired gentleman from Paris who
comes to Wayan for kidney treatments. Meanwhile, Wayan had turned on the radio and
Kenny Rogers was singing Coward of the County, while three Japanese girls wandered randomly
into the shop to see if they could get medicinal massages. As I tried to talk the Japanese
girls into eating some of my birthday cake, the two orphansBig Ketut and Little Ketutwere
decorating my hair with the giant spangled barrettes theyd saved up all their
money to buy me as a gift. Wayans nieces and nephews, the child temple dancers, the chil-
dren of rice farmers, sat very still, tentatively staring at the floor, dressed in gold like miniature
deities; they imbued the room with a strange and otherworldly godliness. Outside, the roosters
started crowing, even though it was not yet evening, not yet dusk. My traditional Balinese
clothing was squeezing me like an ardent hug, and I was feeling like this was definitely the
strangestbut maybe the happiestbirthday party Id ever experienced in my whole life.
Eat, Pray, Love

 103


 Still, Wayan needs to buy a house, and Im getting worried that its not happening. I dont
understand why its not happening, but it absolutely needs to happen. Felipe and I have
stepped in now. We found a realtor who could take us around and show us properties, but
Wayan hasnt liked anything weve shown her. I keep telling her, Wayan, its important that
we buy something. Im leaving here in September, and I need to let my friends know before I
leave that their money actually went into a home for you. And you need to get a roof over your
head before you get evicted.
Not so simple to buy land in Bali, she keeps telling me. Not like to walk into a bar and
buy a beer. Can take long time.
We dont have a long time, Wayan.
She just shrugs, and I remember again about the Balinese concept of rubber time,
meaning that time is a very relative and bouncy idea. Four weeks doesnt really mean to
Wayan what it means to me. One day to Wayan isnt necessarily composed of twenty-four
hours, either; sometimes its longer, sometimes its shorter, depending upon the spiritual and
emotional nature of that day. As with my medicine man and his mysterious age, sometimes
you count the days, sometimes you weigh them.
Meanwhile, it also turns out that I have completely underestimated how expensive it is to
buy property in Bali. Because everything is so cheap here, you would assume that land is
also undervalued, but thats a mistaken assumption. To buy land in Baliespecially in
Ubudcan get almost as expensive as buying land in Westchester County, in Tokyo, or on
Rodeo Drive. Which is completely illogical because once you own the property you cant
make back your money on it in any traditionally logical way. You may pay approximately
$25,000 for an aro of land (an aro is a land measurement roughly translating into English as:
Slightly bigger than the parking spot for an SUV), and then you can build a little shop there
where you will sell one batik sarong a day to one tourist a day for the rest of your life, for a
profit of about seventy-five cents a hit. Its senseless.
But the Balinese value their land with a passion that extends beyond the reaches of economic
sense. Since land ownership is traditionally the only wealth that Balinese recognize as
legitimate, property is valued in the same way as the Masai value cattle or as my five-year-old
niece values lip gloss: namely, that you cannot have enough of it, that once you have claimed
it you must never let it go, and that all of it in the world should rightfully belong to you.
Moreoveras I discover throughout the month of August, during my Narnia-like voyage
into the intricacies of Indonesian real estateits almost impossible to find out when land is
actually for sale around here. Balinese who are selling land typically dont like other people to
know that their land is up for sale. Now, you would think it might be advantageous to advertise
this fact, but the Balinese dont see it that way. If youre a Balinese farmer and youre selling
your land, it means you are desperate for cash, and this is humiliating. Also, if your neighbors
and family find out that you actually sold some land, then theyll assume you came into some
money, and everyone will be asking if they can borrow that money. So land becomes available
for sale only by . . . rumor. And all these land deals are executed under strange veils of
secrecy and deception.
The Western expatriates around herehearing that Im trying to buy land for Wayanstart
gathering around me, offering cautionary tales based on their own nightmarish experiences.
They warn me that you can never really be certain whats going on when it comes
to real estate around here. The land you are buying may not actually belong to the person
who is selling it. The guy who showed you the property might not even be the owner, but
only the disgruntled nephew of the owner, trying to get one over on his uncle because of
some old family dispute. Dont expect that the boundaries of your property will ever be clear.
The land you buy for your dream house may later be declared too close to a temple to allow
a building permit (and its difficult, in this small country with an estimated 20,000 temples, to
find any land that is not too close to a temple).
Also you must take into consideration that youre quite probably living on the slopes of a
volcano and you might be straddling a fault line, as well. And not just a geological fault line,
either. As idyllic as Bali seems, the wise keep in mind that this is, in fact, Indonesiathe
largest Islamic nation on earth, unstable at its core, corrupt from the highest ministers of
justice all the way down to the guy who pumps gas into your car (and who only pretends to fill
it all the way up). Some kind of revolution will always be possible here at any moment, and all
your assets may be reclaimed by the victors. Probably at gunpoint.
Negotiating all this dodgy business is not something I have any qualifications whatsoever
to be doing. I meanI went through a divorce proceeding in New York State and everything,
but this is another page of Kafka altogether. Meanwhile, $18,000 of money donated by me,
my family and my dearest friends is sitting in Wayans bank account, converted into Indonesia
rupiaha currency that has a history of crashing without notice and turning to vapor. And
Wayan is supposed to get evicted from her shop in September, which is around the time I
leave the country. Which is in about three weeks.
But its turning out to be almost impossible for Wayan to find a piece of land she deems
appropriate for a home. Setting aside all the practical considerations, she has to examine the
taksuthe spiritof each place. As a healer, Wayans sense of taksu, even by Balinese
standards, is supremely acute. I found one place that I thought was perfect, but Wayan said it
was possessed by angry demons. The next piece of land was rejected because it was too
close to a river, which, as everyone knows, is where ghosts live. (The night after she saw that
place, Wayan says, she dreamt of a beautiful woman in torn clothes, weeping, and that did
itwe could not buy this land.) Then we found a lovely little shop near town, with a backyard
and everything, but it was located on a corner, and only somebody who wants to go bankrupt
and die young would ever live in a house located on a corner. As everyone knows.
Dont even try talking her out of it, Felipe advised me. Trust me, darling. Dont get
between the Balinese and their taksu.
Then last week Felipe found a place that seemed to fit the criteria exactlya small, pretty
piece of land, close to central Ubud, on a quiet road, next to a rice field, plenty of space for a
garden and well within our budget. When I asked Wayan, Should we buy it? she replied,
Dont know yet, Liz. Not too fast, for making decisions like this. I need talk to a priest first.
She explained that she would need to consult a priest in order to find an auspicious day
upon which to purchase the land, if she does decide to buy it at all. Because nothing significant
can be done in Bali before an auspicious day is chosen. But she cant even ask the
priests for the auspicious date upon which to buy the land until she decides if she really wants
to live there. Which is a commitment she refuses to make until shes had an auspicious
dream. Aware of my dwindling days here, I asked Wayan, like a good New Yorker, How soon
can you arrange to have an auspicious dream?
Wayan replied, like a good Balinese, Cannot be rushed, this. Although, she mused, it
might help if she could go to one of the major temples in Bali with an offering, and pray to the
gods to bring her an auspicious dream . . .
OK, I said. Tomorrow Felipe can drive you to the major temple and you can make an offering
and ask the gods to please send you an auspicious dream.
Wayan would love to, she said. Its a great idea. Only one problem. Shes not permitted to
enter any temples for this entire week.
Because she is . . . menstruating.
Eat, Pray, Love

 104


 Maybe Im not getting across how fun all this is. Truly, its so much odd and satisfying fun,
trying to figure all this out. Or maybe Im just enjoying this surreal moment in my life so much
because I happen to be falling in love, and that always makes the world seem delightful, no
matter how insane your reality.
I always liked Felipe. But theres something about the way he takes on The Saga of Wayans
House that brings us together during the month of August like a real couple. Its none of
his concern, of course, what happens to this trippy Balinese medicine woman. Hes a businessman.
Hes managed to live in Bali for five years without getting too entwined in the personal
lives and complex rituals of the Balinese, but suddenly here he is wading with me
through muddy rice paddies and trying to find a priest who will give Wayan an auspicious date
. . .
I was perfectly happy in my boring life before you came along, he always says.
He was bored in Bali before. He was languid and killing time, a character from a Graham
Greene novel. That indolence stopped the moment we were introduced. Now that were together,
I get to hear Felipes version of how we met, a delicious story I never tire of hearingabout
how he saw me at the party that night, standing with my back to him, and how I
did not even need to turn my head and show him my face before he had realized somewhere
deep in his gut, That is my woman. I will do anything to have that woman.
And it was easy to get you, he says. All I had to do was beg and plead for weeks.
You didnt beg and plead.
You didnt notice me begging and pleading?
He talks about how we went dancing that first night we met, and how he watched me get
all attracted to that cute Welsh guy, and how his heart sank as he saw the scene unfolding,
thinking, Im putting all this work into seducing this woman, and now that handsome young
guys just going to take her from me and bring so much complication into her lifeif only she
knew how much love I could offer her.
Which he can. Hes a caregiver by nature, and I can feel him going into a kind of orbit
around me, making me the key directional setting for his compass, growing into the role of be-
ing my attendant knight. Felipe is the kind of man who desperately needs a woman in his
lifebut not so that he can be taken care of; only so that he can have someone to care for,
someone to consecrate himself to. Having lived without such a relationship ever since his
marriage ended, hes been adrift in life recently, but now he is organizing himself around me.
Its lovely to be treated this way. But it also scares me. I hear him downstairs sometimes making
me dinner as I am lounging upstairs reading, and hes whistling some happy Brazilian
samba, calling up, Darlingwould you like another glass of wine? and I wonder if I am capable
of being somebodys sun, somebodys everything. Am I centered enough now to be the
center of somebody elses life? But when I finally brought up the topic with him one night, he
said, Have I asked you to be that person, darling? Have I asked you to be the center of my
life?
I was immediately ashamed of myself for my vanity, for having assumed that he wanted
me to stay with him forever so that he could indulge my whims till the end of time.
Im sorry, I said. That was a little arrogant, wasnt it?
A little, he acknowledged, then kissed my ear. But not so much, really. Darling, of
course its something we have to discuss because heres the truthIm wildly in love with
you. I blanched in reflex, and he made a quick joke, trying to be reassuring: I mean that in a
completely hypothetical way, of course. But then he said in all seriousness, Look, Im fiftytwo
years old. Believe me, I already know how the world works. I recognize that you dont
love me yet the way I love you, but the truth is that I dont really care. For some reason, I feel
the same way about you that I felt about my kids when they were smallthat it wasnt their
job to love me, it was my job to love them. You can decide to feel however you want to, but I
love you and I will always love you. Even if we never see each other again, you already
brought me back to life, and thats a lot. And of course, Id like to share my life with you. The
only problem is, Im not sure how much of a life I can offer you in Bali.
This is a concern Ive had, too. Ive been watching the expatriate society in Ubud, and I
know for a stone-cold fact this is not the life for me. Everywhere in this town you see the same
kind of characterWesterners who have been so ill-treated and badly worn by life that
theyve dropped the whole struggle and decided to camp out here in Bali indefinitely, where
they can live in a gorgeous house for $200 a month, perhaps taking a young Balinese man or
woman as a companion, where they can drink before noon without getting any static about it,
where they can make a bit of money exporting a bit of furniture for somebody. But generally,
all they are doing here is seeing to it that nothing serious will ever be asked of them again.
These are not bums, mind you. This is a very high grade of people, multinational, talented
and clever. But it seems to me that everyone I meet here used to be something once
(generally married or employed); now they are all united by the absence of the one thing
they seem to have surrendered completely and forever: ambition. Needless to say, theres a
lot of drinking.
Of course, the precious Balinese town of Ubud is not such a bad place to putter away your
life, ignoring the passing of the days. I suppose in that way its similar to places like Key West,
Florida, or Oaxaca, Mexico. Most expats in Ubud, when you ask them how long theyve lived
here, arent really sure. For one thing, they arent really sure how much time has passed since
they moved to Bali. But for another thing, its like they arent really sure if they do live here.
They belong to nowhere, unanchored. Some of them like to imagine that theyre just hanging
out for a while, just running the engine on idle at the traffic light, waiting for the signal to
change. But after seventeen years of that you start to wonder . . . does anybody ever leave?
There is much to enjoy in their lazy company, in these long Sunday afternoons spent at
brunch, drinking champagne and talking about nothing. Still, when I am around this scene, I
feel somewhat like Dorothy in the poppy fields of Oz. Be careful! Dont fall asleep in this narcotic
meadow, or you could doze away the rest of your life here!
So what will become of me and Felipe? Now that there is, it seems, a me and Felipe? He
told me not long ago, Sometimes I wish you were a lost little girl and I could scoop you up
and say, Come and live with me now, let me take care of you forever. But you arent a lost
little girl. Youre a woman with a career, with ambition. You are a perfect snail: you carry your
home on your back. You should hold on to that freedom for as long as possible. But all Im
saying is thisif you want this Brazilian man, you can have him. Im yours already.
Im not sure what I want. I do know that theres a part of me which has always wanted to
hear a man say, Let me take care of you forever, and I have never heard it spoken before.
Over the last few years, Id given up looking for that person, learned how to say this heartening
sentence to myself, especially in times of fear. But to hear it from someone else now, from
someone who is speaking sincerely . . .
I was thinking about all this last night after Felipe fell asleep, and I was curled up beside
him, wondering what would become of us. What are the possible futures? What about the
geography question between uswhere would we live? Then theres the age difference to
consider. Though, when I called my mother the other day to tell her Id met a really nice man,
butbrace yourself, Mom!hes fifty-two years old, she was completely non-flummoxed. All
she said was, Well, Ive got news for you, Liz. Youre thirty-five. (Excellent point, Ma. Im
lucky to get anyone at such a withered age.) Truthfully, though, I dont really mind the age difference,
either. I actually like that Felipe is so much older. I think its sexy. Makes me feel kind
of . . . French.
What will happen with us?
Why am I worrying about this, by the way?
What have I not yet learned about the futility of worry?
So after a while, I stopped thinking about all this and just held him while he slept. I am falling
in love with this man. Then I fell asleep beside him and had two memorable dreams.
Both were about my Guru. In the first dream, my Guru informed me that she was closing
down her Ashrams and that she would no longer be speaking, teaching or publishing books.
She gave her students one final speech, in which she said, Youve had more than enough
teachings. You have been given everything you need to know in order to be free. Its time for
you to go out in the world and live a happy life.
The second dream was even more confirming. I was eating in a terrific restaurant in New
York City with Felipe. We were having a wonderful meal of lamb chops and artichokes and
fine wine and we were talking and laughing happily. I looked across the room and saw Swamiji,
my Gurus master, deceased since 1982. But he was alive that night, right there in a
snazzy New York restaurant. He was eating dinner with a group of his friends and they also
seemed to be having a merry time of it. Our eyes met across the room and Swamiji smiled at
me and raised his wineglass in a toast.
And thenquite distinctlythis small Indian Guru who had spoken precious little English
during his lifetime mouthed this one word to me across the distance: Enjoy.
Eat, Pray, Love

 105


 I havent seen Ketut Liyer in so long. Between my involvement with Felipe and my struggle
to secure a home for Wayan, my long afternoons of aimless conversation about spirituality on
the medicine mans porch have long since ended. Ive stopped by his house a few times, just
to say hello and to drop off a gift of fruit for his wife, but we havent spent any quality time together
since back in June. Whenever I try to apologize to Ketut for my absence, though, he
laughs like a man who has already been shown the answers to every test in the universe and
says, Everything working perfect, Liss.
Still, I miss the old man, so I stopped by to hang out with him this morning. He beamed at
me, as usual, saying, I am very happy to meet you! (I never was able to break him of that
habit.)
I am happy to see you, too, Ketut.
You leaving soon, Liss?
Yes, Ketut. In less than two weeks. Thats why I wanted to come over today. I wanted to
thank you for everything youve given me. If it wasnt for you, I never wouldve come back to
Bali.
Always you were coming back to Bali, he said without doubt or drama. You still meditate
with your four brothers like I teach you?
Yes.
You still meditate like your Guru in India teach you?
Yes.
You have bad dreams anymore?
No.
You happy now with God?
Very.
You love new boyfriend?
I think so. Yes.
Then you must spoil him. And he must spoil you.
OK, I promised.
You are good friend to me. Better than friend. You are like my daughter, he said. (Not
like Sharon . . .) When I die, you will come back to Bali, come to my cremation. Balinese
cremation ceremony very funyou will like it.
OK, I promised again, all choked up now.
Let your conscience be your guide. If you have Western friends come to visit Bali, bring
them to me for palm-reading. I am very empty in my bank since the bomb. You want to come
with me to baby ceremony today?
And this is how I ended up participating in the blessing of a baby who had reached the
age of six months, and who was now ready to touch the earth for the first time. The Balinese
dont let their children touch the ground for the first six months of life, because newborn babies
are considered to be gods sent straight from heaven, and you wouldnt let a god crawl
around on the floor with all the toenail clippings and cigarette butts. So Balinese babies are
carried for those first six months, revered as minor deities. If a baby dies before it is six
months old, it is given a special cremation ceremony and the ashes are not placed in a human
cemetery because this being was never human: it was only ever a god. But if the baby
lives to six months, then a big ceremony is held and the childs feet are allowed to touch the
earth at last and Junior is welcomed to the human race.
This ceremony today was held at the house of one of Ketuts neighbors. The baby in
question was a girl, already nicknamed Putu. Her parents were a beautiful teenage girl and an
equally beautiful teenage boy, who is the grandson of a man who is Ketuts cousin, or
something like that. Ketut wore his finest clothes for the eventa white satin sarong (trimmed
in gold) and a white, long-sleeved button-down jacket with gold buttons and a Nehru collar,
which made him look rather like a railroad porter or a busboy at a fancy hotel. He had a white
turban wrapped around his head. His hands, as he proudly showed me, were all pimped out
with giant gold rings and magic stones. About seven rings in total. All of them with holy
powers. He had his grandfathers shining brass bell for summoning spirits, and he wanted me
to take a lot of photographs of him.
We walked over to his neighbors compound together. It was a considerable distance and
we had to walk on the busy main road for a while. Id been in Bali almost four months, and
had never seen Ketut leave his compound before. It was disconcerting watching him walk
down the highway amid all the speeding cars and madcap motorcycles. He looked so tiny and
vulnerable. He looked so wrong set against this modern backdrop of traffic and honking
horns. It made me want to cry, for some reason, but I was feeling a little extra emotive today
anyway.
About forty guests were there already at the neighbors house when we arrived, and the
family altar was heaped with offeringspiles of woven palm baskets filled with rice, flowers,
incense, roasted pigs, some dead geese and chickens, coconut and bits of currency that
fluttered around in the breeze. Everyone was decked out in their most elegant silks and lace. I
was underdressed, sweaty from my bike ride, self-conscious in my broken T-shirt amid all this
beauty. But I was welcomed exactly the way you would want to be if you were the white girl
whod wandered in inappropriately attired and uninvited. Everyone smiled at me with warmth,
and then ignored me and commenced to the part of the party where they all sat around admiring
each others clothes.
The ceremony took hours, Ketut officiating. Only an anthropologist with a team of interpreters
could tell you all that occurred, but some of the rituals I understood, from Ketuts explanations
and from books that I had read. The father held the baby during the first round of
blessings and the mother held an effigy of the babya coconut swaddled to look like an infant.
This coconut was blessed and doused with holy water just like the real baby, then placed
on the ground right before the babys feet touch earth for the first time; this is to fool the
demons, who will attack the dummy baby and leave the real baby alone.
There were hours of chants, though, before that real babys feet could touch ground. Ketut
rang his bell and sang his mantras endlessly, and the young parents beamed with pleasure
and pride. The guests came and went, milling about, gossiping, watching the ceremony for a
while, offering their gifts and then taking off for another appointment. It was all strangely casual
amid all the ancient ritualistic formality, sort of backyard-picnic-meets-high-church. The
mantras Ketut chanted to the baby were so sweet, sounding like a combination of the sacred
and the affectionate. While the mother held the infant, Ketut waved before the child samples
of food, fruit, flowers, water, bells, a wing from the roast chicken, a bit of pork, a cracked
coconut . . . With each new item he would sing something to her. The baby would laugh and
clap her hands, and Ketut would laugh and keep singing.
I imagined my own translation of his words:
Ohhhh . . . little baby, this is roast chicken for you to eat! Someday you will love roast
chicken and we hope you have lots of it! Ohhhhhhh . . . little baby, this is a chunk of cooked
rice, may you always have all the chunks of cooked rice you could ever desire, may you be
showered with rice for always. Ohhhhh . . . little baby, this is a coconut, isnt it funny how this
coconut looks, someday you will eat lots of coconuts! Ohhhhhh . . . little baby, this is your
family, do you not see how much your family adores you? Ohhhhh . . . little baby, you are precious
to the whole universe! You are an A-plus student! You are our magnificent bunny! You
are a yummy hunk of silly putty! Ooohhhhh little baby, you are the Sultan of Swing, you are
our everything . . .
Everyone was blessed again and again with flower petals dipped in holy water. The whole
family took turns passing the baby around, cooing to her, while Ketut sang the ancient mantras.
They even let me hold the baby for a while, even in my jeans, and I whispered my own
blessings to her as everyone sang. Good luck, I told her. Be brave. It was boiling hot, even
in the shade. The young mother, dressed in a sexy bustier under her sheer lace shirt, was
sweating. The young father, who didnt seem to know any facial expression other than a
massively proud grin, was also sweating. The various grandmothers fanned themselves, got
weary, sat down, stood up, fussed with the roasted sacrificial pigs, chased away dogs. Everyone
was alternately interested, not interested, tired, laughing, earnest. But Ketut and the baby
seemed to be locked in their own experience together, riveted to each others attention. The
baby didnt take her eyes off the old medicine man all day. Who ever heard of a six-month-old
baby not crying or fussing or sleeping for four straight hours in the hot sun, but just watching
someone with curiosity?
Ketut did his job well, and the baby did her job well, too. She was fully present for her
transformation ceremony from god-status to human-status. She was handling the responsibilities
marvelously, like a good Balinese girl alreadysteeped in ritual, confident of her beliefs,
obedient to the requirements of her culture.
At the end of all the chanting, the baby was wrapped in a long, clean white sheet that
hung far below her little legs, making her look tall and regala veritable debutante. Ketut
made a drawing on the bottom of a pottery bowl of the four directions of the universe, filled
the bowl with holy water and set it on the ground. This hand-drawn compass marked the holy
spot on earth where the babys feet would first touch.
Then the whole family gathered by the baby, everyone seeming to hold her at the same
time, andoop! there goes!they lightly dipped the babys feet in this pottery bowl full of holy
water, right above the magic drawing which encompassed the whole universe, and then they
touched her soles to the earth for the first time. When they lifted her back up into the air, tiny
damp footprints remained on the ground below her, orienting this child at last onto the great
Balinese grid, establishing who she was by establishing where she was. Everyone clapped
their hands, delighted. The little girl was one of us now. A human beingwith all the risks and
thrills which that perplexing incarnation entails.
The baby looked up, looked around, smiled. She wasnt a god anymore. She didnt seem
to mind. She wasnt fearful at all. She seemed thoroughly satisfied with every decision she
had ever made.
Eat, Pray, Love

 106


 The deal fell through with Wayan. That property Felipe had found for her somehow didnt
happen. When I ask Wayan what went wrong, I get some fuzzy reply about a lost deed; I
dont think I was ever told the real story. What matters is only that its a dead deal. Im starting
to get kind of panicked about this whole Wayan house situation. I try to explain my urgency to
her, saying, WayanI have to leave Bali in less than two weeks and go back to America. I
cant face my friends who gave me all this money and tell them that you still dont have a
home.
But Liz, if a place has no good taksu . . .
Everybody has a different sense of urgency in this life.
But a few days later Wayan calls over at Felipes house, giddy. Shes found a different
piece of land, and this one she really loves. An emerald expanse of rice field on a quiet road,
close to town. It has good taksu written all over it. Wayan tells us that the land belongs to a
farmer, a friend of her fathers, who is desperate for cash. He has seven aro total to sell, but
(needing fast money) would be willing to give her only the two aro she can afford. She loves
this land. I love this land. Felipe loves this land. Tuttispinning across the grass in circles,
arms extended, a little Balinese Julie Andrewsloves it, too.
Buy it, I tell Wayan.
But a few days pass, and she keeps stalling. Do you want to live there or not? I keep
asking.
She stalls some more, then changes her story again. This morning, she says, the farmer
called to tell her he isnt certain anymore whether he can sell only the two-aro parcel to her;
instead, he might want to sell the whole seven-aro lot intact . . . its his wife thats the problem
. . . The farmer needs to talk to his wife, see if its OK with her to break up the land . . .
Wayan says, Maybe if I had more money . . .
Dear God, she wants me to come up with the cash to buy the whole chunk of land. Even
as Im trying to figure out how to raise a staggering 22,000 extra American dollars, Im telling
her, Wayan, I cant do it, I dont have the money. Cant you make a deal with the farmer?
Then Wayan, whose eyes are not exactly meeting mine anymore, crochets a complicated
story. She tells me that she visited a mystic the other day and the mystic went into a trance
and said that Wayan absolutely needs to buy this entire seven-aro package in order to make
a good healing center . . . that this is destiny . . . and, anyway, the mystic also said that if
Wayan could have the entire package of land, then maybe she could someday build a nice
fancy hotel there . . .
A nice fancy hotel?
 Ah.

Thats when suddenly I go deaf and the birds stop singing and I can see Wayans mouth
moving but Im not listening to her anymore because a thought has just come, scrawled
blatantly across my mind: SHES FUCKING WITH YOU, GROCERIES.
I stand up, say good-bye to Wayan, walk home slowly and ask Felipe point-blank for his
opinion: Is she fucking with me?
He has not ever commented upon my business with Wayan, not once.
Darling, he says kindly. Of course shes fucking with you.
My heart drops into my guts with a splat.
But not intentionally, he adds quickly. You need to understand the thinking in Bali. Its a
way of life here for people to try to get the most money they can out of visitors. Its how everyone
survives. So shes making up some stories now about the farmer. Darling, since when
does a Balinese man need to talk to his wife before he can make a business deal?
Listenthe guy is desperate to sell her a small parcel; he already said he would. But she
wants the whole thing now. And she wants you to buy it for her.
I cringe at this for two reasons. First of all, I hate to think this could be true of Wayan.
Second, I hate the cultural implications under his speech, the whiff of colonial White Mans
Burden stuff, the patronizing this-is-what-all-these-people-are-like argument.
But Felipe isnt a colonialist; hes a Brazilian. He explains, Listen, I grew up poor in South
America. You think I dont understand the culture of this kind of poverty? Youve given Wayan
more money than shes ever seen in her life and now shes thinking crazy. As far as shes
concerned, youre her miracle benefactor and this might be her last chance to ever get a
break. So she wants to get all she can before you go. For Gods sakefour months ago the
poor woman didnt have enough money to buy lunch for her child and now she wants a
hotel?
What should I do?
Dont get angry about it, whatever happens. If you get angry, youll lose her, and that
would be a pity because shes a marvelous person and she loves you. This is her survival tactic,
just accept that. You must not think that shes not a good person, or that she and the kids
dont honestly need your help. But you cannot let her take advantage of you. Darling, Ive
seen it repeated so many times. What happens with Westerners who live here for a long time
is that they usually end up falling into one of two camps. Half of them keep playing the tourist,
saying, Oh, those lovely Balinese, so sweet, so gracious . . . , and getting ripped off like
crazy. The other half get so frustrated with being ripped off all the time, they start to hate the
Balinese. And thats a shame, because then youve lost all these wonderful friends.
But what should I do?
You need to get back some control of the situation. Play some kind of game with her, like
the games shes playing with you. Threaten her with something that motivates her to act.
Youll be doing her a favor; she needs a home.
I dont want to play games, Felipe.
He kisses my head. Then you cant live in Bali, darling.
The next morning, I hatch my plan. I cant believe ithere I am, after a year of studying
virtues and struggling to find an honest life for myself, about to spin a big fat lie. Im about to
lie to my favorite person in Bali, to someone who is like a sister to me, someone who has
cleaned my kidneys. For heavens sake, Im going to lie to Tuttis mommy!
I walk into town, into Wayans shop. Wayan goes to hug me. I pull away, pretending to be
upset.
Wayan, I say. We need to talk. I have a serious problem.
With Felipe?
No. With you.
She looks like shes going to faint.
Wayan, I say. My friends in America are very angry with you.
With me? Why, honey?
Because four months ago, they gave you a lot of money to buy a home, and you did not
buy a home yet. Every day, they send me e-mails, asking me, Where is Wayans house?
Where is my money? Now they think you are stealing their money, using it for something
else.
Im not stealing!
Wayan, I say. My friends in America think you are . . . a bullshit.
She gasps as if shes been punched in the windpipe. She looks so wounded, I waver for a
moment and almost grab her in a reassuring hug and say, No, no, its not true! Im making
this up! But, no, I have to finish this. But, Lord, she is clearly staggered now. Bullshit is a
word that has been more emotionally incorporated into Balinese than almost any other in the
English language. Its one of the very worst things you can call someone in Balia bullshit.
In this culture, where people bullshit each other a dozen times before breakfast, where bullshitting
is a sport, an art, a habit, and a desperate survival tactic, to actually call someone out
on their bullshit is an appalling statement. Its something that would have, in old Europe, guaranteed
you a duel.
Honey, she said, eyes tearing. I am not a bullshit!
I know that, Wayan. This is why Im so upset. I try to tell my friends in America that Wayan
is not a bullshit, but they dont believe me.
She lays her hand on mine. Im sorry to put you in a pickle, honey.
Wayan, this is a very big pickle. My friends are angry. They say that you must buy some
land before I come back to America. They told me that if you dont buy some land in the next
week, then I must . . . take the money back.
Now she doesnt look like shes going to faint; she looks like shes going to die. I feel like
one-half of the biggest prick in history, spinning this tale to this poor woman, whoamong
other thingsobviously doesnt realize that I no more have the power to take that money out
of her bank account than I have to revoke her Indonesian citizenship. But how could she
know that? I made the money magically appear in her bankbook, didnt I? Couldnt I just as
easily take it away?
Honey, she says, believe me, I find land now, dont worry, very fast I find land. Please
dont worry . . . maybe in next three days this is finish, I promise.
You must, Wayan, I say, with a gravity that is not entirely acting. The fact is, she must.
Her kids need a home. Shes about to get evicted. This is no time to be a bullshit.
I say, Im going back to Felipes house now. Call me when youve bought something.
Then I walk away from my friend, aware that she is watching me but refusing to turn
around and look back at her. All the way home, Im offering up to God the weirdest prayer:
Please, let it be true that shes been bullshitting me. Because if she wasnt bullshitting, if
shes genuinely incapable of finding herself a place to live despite an $18,000 cash infusion,
then were in really big trouble here and I dont know how this woman is ever going to pull herself
out of poverty. But if she was bullshitting me, then in a way its a ray of hope. It shows
shes got some wiles, and she might be OK in this shifty world, after all.
I go home to Felipe, feeling awful. I say, If only Wayan knew how deviously I was plotting
behind her back . . .
. . . plotting for her happiness and success, he finishes the sentence for me.
Four hours laterfour measly hours!the phone rings in Felipes house. Its Wayan.
Shes breathless. She wants me to know the job is finished. She has just purchased the two
aro from the farmer (whose wife suddenly didnt seem to mind breaking up the property).
There was no need, as it turns out, for any magic dreams or priestly interventions or taksu radiation-level
tests. Wayan even has the certificate of ownership already, in her very hands!
And its notarized! Also, she assures me, she has already ordered construction materials for
her house and workers will start building early next weekbefore I leave. So I can see the
project under way. She hopes that I am not angry with her. She wants me to know that she
loves me more than she loves her own body, more than she loves her own life, more than she
loves this whole world.
I tell her that I love her, too. And that I cant wait to be a guest someday in her beautiful
new home. And that I would like a photocopy of that certificate of ownership.
When I get off the phone, Felipe says, Good girl.
I dont know whether hes referring to her or me. But he opens a bottle of wine and we
raise a toast to our dear friend Wayan the Balinese landowner.
Then Felipe says, Can we go on vacation now, please?
Eat, Pray, Love

 107


 The place we end up going on vacation is a tiny island called Gili Meno, located off the
coast of Lombok, which is the next stop east of Bali in the great, sprawling Indonesian archipelago.
Id been to Gili Meno before, and I wanted to show it to Felipe, who had never
been there.
The island of Gili Meno is one of the most important places in the world to me. I came
here by myself two years ago when I was in Bali for the first time. I was on that magazine assignment,
writing about Yoga vacations, and Id just finished two weeks of mightily restorative
Yoga classes. But I had decided to extend my stay in Indonesia after the assignment was up,
since I was already all the way over here in Asia. What I wanted to do, actually, was to find
someplace very remote and give myself a ten-day retreat of absolute solitude and absolute silence.
When I look back at the four years that elapsed between my marriage starting to fall apart
and the day I was finally divorced and free, I see a detailed chronicle of total pain. And the
moment when I came to this tiny island all by myself was the very worst of that entire dark
journey. The bottom of the pain and the middle of it. My unhappy mind was a battlefield of
conflicted demons. As I made my decision to spend ten days alone and in silence in the
middle of exactly nowhere, I told all my warring and confused parts the same thing: Were all
here together now, guys, all alone. And were going to have to work out some kind of deal for
how to get along, or else everybody is going to die together, sooner or later.
Which may sound firm and confident, but I must admit this, as wellthat sailing over to
that quiet island all alone, I was never more terrified in my life. I hadnt even brought any
books to read, nothing to distract me. Just me and my mind, about to face each other on an
empty field. I remember that my legs were visibly shaking with fear. Then I quoted to myself
one of my favorite lines ever from my Guru: Fearwho cares? and I disembarked alone.
I rented myself a little cabin on the beach for a few dollars a day and I shut my mouth and
vowed not to open it again until something inside me had changed. Gili Meno Island was my
ultimate truth and reconciliation hearing. I had chosen the right place to do thisthat much
was clear. The island itself is tiny, pristine, sandy, blue water, palm trees. Its a perfect circle
with a single path that goes around it, and you can walk the whole circumference in about an
hour. Its located almost exactly on the equator, and so theres a changelessness about its
daily cycles. The sun comes up on one side of the island at about 6:30 in the morning and
goes down on the other side at around 6:30 PM, every day of the year. The place is inhabited
by a small handful of Muslim fishermen and their families. There is no spot on this island from
which you cannot hear the ocean. There are no motorized vehicles here. Electricity comes
from a generator, and for only a few hours in the evenings. Its the quietest place Ive ever
been.
Every morning I walked the circumference of the island at sunrise, and walked it again at
sunset. The rest of the time, I just sat and watched. Watched my thoughts, watched my emotions,
watched the fishermen. The Yogic sages say that all the pain of a human life is caused
by words, as is all the joy. We create words to define our experience and those words bring
attendant emotions that jerk us around like dogs on a leash. We get seduced by our own
mantras (Im a failure . . . Im lonely . . . Im a failure . . . Im lonely . . .) and we become monuments
to them. To stop talking for a while, then, is to attempt to strip away the power of
words, to stop choking ourselves with words, to liberate ourselves from our suffocating mantras.

It took me a while to drop into true silence. Even after Id stopped talking, I found that I
was still humming with language. My organs and muscles of speechbrain, throat, chest,
back of the neckvibrated with the residual effects of talking long after Id stopped making
sounds. My head shimmied in a reverb of words, the way an indoor swimming pool seems to
echo interminably with sounds and shouts, even after the kindergartners have left for the day.
It took a surprisingly long time for all this pulsation of speech to fall away, for the whirling
noises to settle. Maybe it took about three days.
Then everything started coming up. In that state of silence, there was room now for
everything hateful, everything fearful, to run across my empty mind. I felt like a junkie in detox,
convulsing with the poison of what emerged. I cried a lot. I prayed a lot. It was difficult and it
was terrifying, but this much I knewI never didnt want to be there, and I never wished that
anyone were there with me. I knew that I needed to do this and that I needed to do it alone.
The only other tourists on the island were a handful of couples having romantic vacations.
(Gili Meno is far too pretty and far too remote a place for anyone but a crazy person to come
visit solo.) I watched these couples and felt some envy for their romances, but knew, This is
not your time for companionship, Liz. You have a different task here. I kept away from everyone.
People on the island left me alone. I think I threw off a spooky vibe. I had not been well
all year. You cant lose that much sleep and that much weight and cry so hard for so long
without starting to look like a psychotic. So nobody talked to me.
Actually, thats not true. One person talked to me, every day. It was this little kid, one of a
gang of kids who run up and down the beaches trying to sell fresh fruit to the tourists. This
boy was maybe nine years old, and seemed to be the ringleader. He was tough, scrappy and
I would have called him street-smart if his island actually had any streets. He was beachsmart,
I suppose. Somehow hed learned great English, probably from harassing sunbathing
Westerners. And he was on to me, this kid. Nobody else asked me who I was, nobody else
bothered me, but this relentless child would come and sit next to me on the beach at some
point every day and demand, Why dont you ever talk? Why are you strange like this? Dont
pretend you cant hear meI know you can hear me. Why are you always alone? Why dont
you ever go swimming? Where is your boyfriend? Why dont you have a husband? Whats
wrong with you?
I was like, Back off, kid! What are youa transcript of my most evil thoughts?
Every day I would try to smile at him kindly and send him away with a polite gesture, but
he wouldnt quit until he got a rise out me. And inevitably, he always got a rise out of me. I remember
bursting out at him once, Im not talking because Im on a friggin spiritual journey,
you nasty little punknow go AWAY!
He ran away laughing. Every day, after hed gotten me to respond, he would always run
away laughing. Id usually end up laughing, too, once he was out of sight. I dreaded this
pesky kid and looked forward to him in equal measure. He was my only comedic break during
a really tough ride. Saint Anthony once wrote about having gone into the desert on silent retreat
and being assaulted by all manner of visionsdevils and angels, both. He said, in his
solitude, he sometimes encountered devils who looked like angels, and other times he found
angels who looked like devils. When asked how he could tell the difference, the saint said that
you can only tell which is which by the way you feel after the creature has left your company.
If you are appalled, he said, then it was a devil who had visited you. If you feel lightened, it
was an angel.
I think I know what that little punk was, who always got a laugh out of me.
On my ninth day of silence, I went into meditation one evening on the beach as the sun
was going down and I didnt stand up again until after midnight. I remember thinking, This is
it, Liz. I said to my mind, This is your chance. Show me everything that is causing you sorrow.
Let me see all of it. Dont hold anything back. One by one, the thoughts and memories
of sadness raised their hands, stood up to identify themselves. I looked at each thought, at
each unit of sorrow, and I acknowledged its existence and felt (without trying to protect myself
from it) its horrible pain. And then I would tell that sorrow, Its OK. I love you. I accept you.
Come into my heart now. Its over. I would actually feel the sorrow (as if it were a living thing)
enter my heart (as if it were an actual room). Then I would say, Next? and the next bit of
grief would surface. I would regard it, experience it, bless it, and invite it into my heart, too. I
did this with every sorrowful thought Id ever hadreaching back into years of memoryuntil
nothing was left.
Then I said to my mind, Show me your anger now. One by one, my lifes every incident
of anger rose and made itself known. Every injustice, every betrayal, every loss, every rage. I
saw them all, one by one, and I acknowledged their existence. I felt each piece of anger completely,
as if it were happening for the first time, and then I would say, Come into my heart
now. You can rest there. Its safe now. Its over. I love you. This went on for hours, and I
swung between these mighty poles of opposite feelingsexperiencing the anger thoroughly
for one bone-rattling moment, and then experiencing a total coolness, as the anger entered
my heart as if through a door, laid itself down, curled up against its brothers and gave up
fighting.
Then came the most difficult part. Show me your shame, I asked my mind. Dear God,
the horrors that I saw then. A pitiful parade of all my failings, my lies, my selfishness, jealousy,
arrogance. I didnt blink from any of it, though. Show me your worst, I said. When I tried to
invite these units of shame into my heart, they each hesitated at the door, saying, Noyou
dont want me in there . . . dont you know what I did? and I would say, I do want you. Even
you. I do. Even you are welcome here. Its OK. You are forgiven. You are part of me. You can
rest now. Its over.
When all this was finished, I was empty. Nothing was fighting in my mind anymore. I
looked into my heart, at my own goodness, and I saw its capacity. I saw that my heart was not
even nearly full, not even after having taken in and tended to all those calamitous urchins of
sorrow and anger and shame; my heart could easily have received and forgiven even more.
Its love was infinite.
I knew then that this is how God loves us all and receives us all, and that there is no such
thing in this universe as hell, except maybe in our own terrified minds. Because if even one
broken and limited human being could experience even one such episode of absolute forgiveness
and acceptance of her own self, then imaginejust imagine!what God, in all His
eternal compassion, can forgive and accept.
I also knew somehow that this respite of peace would be temporary. I knew that I was not
yet finished for good, that my anger, my sadness and my shame would all creep back eventually,
escaping my heart, and occupying my head once more. I knew that I would have to keep
dealing with these thoughts again and again until I slowly and determinedly changed my
whole life. And that this would be difficult and exhausting to do. But my heart said to my mind
in the dark silence of that beach: I love you, I will never leave you, I will always take care of
you. That promise floated up out of my heart and I caught it in my mouth and held it there,
tasting it as I left the beach and walked back to the little shack where I was staying. I found an
empty notebook, opened it up to the first pageand only then did I open my mouth and
speak those words into the air, letting them free. I let those words break my silence and then I
allowed my pencil to document their colossal statement onto the page: I love you, I will never
leave you, I will always take care of you.
Those were the first words I ever wrote in that private notebook of mine, which I would
carry with me from that moment forth, turning back to it many times over the next two years,
always asking for helpand always finding it, even when I was most deadly sad or afraid.
And that notebook, steeped through with that promise of love, was quite simply the only reason
I survived the next years of my life.
Eat, Pray, Love

 108


 And now Im coming back to Gili Meno under notably different circumstances. Since I was
last here, Ive circled the world, settled my divorce, survived my final separation from David,
erased all mood-altering medications from my system, learned to speak a new language, sat
upon Gods palm for a few unforgettable moments in India, studied at the feet of an Indonesian
medicine man and purchased a home for a family who sorely needed a place to live. I
am happy and healthy and balanced. And, yes, I cannot help but notice that I am sailing to
this pretty little tropical island with my Brazilian lover. Which isI admit it!an almost
ludicrously fairy-tale ending to this story, like the page out of some housewifes dream.
(Perhaps even a page out of my own dream, from years ago.) Yet what keeps me from dissolving
right now into a complete fairy-tale shimmer is this solid truth, a truth which has veritably
built my bones over the last few yearsI was not rescued by a prince; I was the administrator
of my own rescue.
My thoughts turn to something I read once, something the Zen Buddhists believe. They
say that an oak tree is brought into creation by two forces at the same time. Obviously, there
is the acorn from which it all begins, the seed which holds all the promise and potential, which
grows into the tree. Everybody can see that. But only a few can recognize that there is another
force operating here as wellthe future tree itself, which wants so badly to exist that it pulls
the acorn into being, drawing the seedling forth with longing out of the void, guiding the evolution
from nothingness to maturity. In this respect, say the Zens, it is the oak tree that creates
the very acorn from which it was born.
I think about the woman I have become lately, about the life that I am now living, and
about how much I always wanted to be this person and live this life, liberated from the farce of
pretending to be anyone other than myself. I think of everything I endured before getting here
and wonder if it was meI mean, this happy and balanced me, who is now dozing on the
deck of this small Indonesian fishing boatwho pulled the other, younger, more confused and
more struggling me forward during all those hard years. The younger me was the acorn full of
potential, but it was the older me, the already-existent oak, who was saying the whole time:
Yesgrow! Change! Evolve! Come and meet me here, where I already exist in wholeness
and maturity! I need you to grow into me! And maybe it was this present and fully actualized
me who was hovering four years ago over that young married sobbing girl on the bathroom
floor, and maybe it was this me who whispered lovingly into that desperate girls ear, Go
back to bed, Liz . . . Knowing already that everything would be OK, that everything would
eventually bring us together here. Right here, right to this moment. Where I was always waiting
in peace and contentment, always waiting for her to arrive and join me.
Then Felipe wakes up. Wed both been dozing in and out of consciousness all afternoon,
curled in each others arms on the deck of this Indonesian fishermans sailboat. The ocean
has been swaying us, the sun shining. While I lie there with my head pillowed on his chest,
Felipe tells me that he had an idea while he was sleeping. He says, You knowI obviously
need to keep living in Bali because my business is here, and because its so close to Australia,
where my kids live. I also need to be in Brazil often, because thats where the gemstones
are and because I have family there. And you obviously need to be in the United
States, because thats where your work is, and thats where your family and friends are. So I
was thinking . . . maybe we could try to build a life together thats somehow divided between
America, Australia, Brazil and Bali.
All I can do is laugh, because, heywhy not? It just might be crazy enough to work. A life
like this might strike some people as absolutely loony, as sheer foolishness, but it resembles
me so closely. Of course this is how we should proceed. It feels so familiar already. And I
quite like the poetry of his idea, too, I must say. I mean that literally. After this whole year
spent exploring the individual and intrepid Is, Felipe has just suggested to me a whole new
theory of traveling:
Australia, America, Bali, Brazil = A, A, B, B.
Like a classic poem, like a pair of rhyming couplets.
The little fishing boat anchors right off the shore of Gili Meno. There are no docks here on
this island. You have to roll up your pants, jump off the boat and wade in through the surf on
your own power. Theres absolutely no way to do this without getting soaking wet or even
banged up on the coral, but its worth all the trouble because the beach here is so beautiful,
so special. So me and my lover, we take off our shoes, we pile our small bags of belongings
on the tops of our heads and we prepare to leap over the edge of that boat together, into the
sea.
You know, its a funny thing. The only Romance language Felipe doesnt happen to speak
is Italian. But I go ahead and say it to him anyway, just as were about to jump.
I say: Attraversiamo.
Lets cross over.


The Time Traveller's Wife

CLARE: Its hard being left behind. I wait for Henry, not knowing where he is, wondering if
hes okay. Its hard to be the one who stays.
I keep myself busy. Time goes faster that way.
I go to sleep alone, and wake up alone. I take walks. I work until Im tired. I watch the
wind play with the trash thats been under the snow all winter. Everything seems simple until
you think about it. Why is love intensified by absence?
Long ago, men went to sea, and women waited for them, standing on the edge of the
water, scanning the horizon for the tiny ship. Now I wait for Henry. He vanishes unwillingly,
without warning. I wait for him. Each moment that I wait feels like a year, an eternity. Each
moment is as slow and transparent as glass. Through each moment I can see infinite
moments lined up, waiting. Why has he gone where I cannot follow?
HENRY: How does it feel? How does it feel? Sometimes it feels as though your attention has
wandered for just an instant. Then, with a start, you realize that the book you were holding,
the red plaid cotton shirt with white buttons, the favorite black jeans and the maroon socks
with an almost-hole in one heel, the living room, the about-to-whistle tea kettle in the
kitchen: all of these have vanished. You are standing, naked as a jaybird, up to your ankles in
ice water in a ditch along an unidentified rural route. You wait a minute to see if maybe you
will just snap right back to your book, your apartment, et cetera. After about five minutes of
swearing and shivering and hoping to hell you can just disappear, you start walking in any
direction, which will eventually yield a farmhouse, where you have the option of stealing or
explaining. Stealing will sometimes land you in jail, but explaining is more tedious and timeconsuming
and involves lying anyway, and also sometimes results in being hauled off to jail,
so what the hell.
Sometimes you feel as though you have stood up too quickly even if you are lying in bed
half asleep. You hear blood rushing in your head, feel vertiginous falling sensations. Your
hands and feet are tingling and then they arent there at all. Youve mislocated yourself
again. It only takes an instant, you have just enough time to try to hold on, to flail around
(possibly damaging yourself or valuable possessions) and then you are skidding across the
forest-green-carpeted hallway of a Motel 6 in Athens, Ohio, at 4:16 a.m., Monday, August 6,
1981, and you hit your head on someones door, causing this person, a Ms. Tina Schulman
from Philadelphia, to open this door and start screaming because theres a naked, carpetburned
man passed out at her feet. You wake up in the County Hospital concussed with a
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
6
policeman sitting outside your door listening to the Phillies game on a crackly transistor
radio. Mercifully, you lapse back into unconsciousness and wake up again hours later in your
own bed with your wife leaning over you looking very worried.
Sometimes you feel euphoric. Everything is sublime and has an aura, and suddenly you
are intensely nauseated and then you are gone. You are throwing up on some suburban
geraniums, or your fathers tennis shoes, or your very own bathroom floor three days ago, or
a wooden sidewalk in Oak Park, Illinois, circa 1903, or a tennis court on a fine autumn day in
the 1950s, or your own naked feet in a wide variety of times and places.
How does it feel?
It feels exactly like one of those dreams in which you suddenly realize that you have to
take a test you havent studied for and you arent wearing any clothes. And youve left your
wallet at home.
When I am out there, in time, I am inverted, changed into a desperate version of myself. I
become a thief, a vagrant, an animal who runs and hides. I startle old women and amaze
children. I am a trick, an illusion of the highest order, so incredible that I am actually true.
Is there a logic, a rule to all this coming and going, all this dislocation? Is there a way to
stay put, to embrace the present with every cell? I dont know. There are clues; as with any
disease there are patterns, possibilities. Exhaustion, loud noises, stress, standing up suddenly,
flashing lightany of these can trigger an episode. But: I can be reading the Sunday Times,
coffee in hand and Clare dozing beside me on our bed and suddenly Im in 1976 watching
my thirteen-year-old self mow my grandparents lawn. Some of these episodes last only
moments; its like listening to a car radio thats having trouble holding on to a station. I find
myself in crowds, audiences, mobs. Just as often I am alone, in a field, house, car, on a
beach, in a grammar school in the middle of the night. I fear finding myself in a prison cell,
an elevator full of people, the middle of a highway. I appear from nowhere, naked. How can
I explain? I have never been able to carry anything with me. No clothes, no money, no ID. I
spend most of my sojourns acquiring clothing and trying to hide. Fortunately I dont wear
glasses.
Its ironic, really. All my pleasures are homey ones: armchair splendor, the sedate
excitements of domesticity. All I ask for are humble delights. A mystery novel in bed, the
smell of Clares long red-gold hair damp from washing, a postcard from a friend on vacation,
cream dispersing into coffee, the softness of the skin under Clares breasts, the symmetry of
grocery bags sitting on the kitchen counter waiting to be unpacked. I love meandering
through the stacks at the library after the patrons have gone home, lightly touching the spines
of the books. These are the things that can pierce me with longing when I am displaced from
them by Times whim.
And Clare, always Clare. Clare in the morning, sleepy and crumple-faced. Clare with her
arms plunging into the papermaking vat, pulling up the mold and shaking it so, and so, to
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
7
meld the fibers. Clare reading, with her hair hanging over the back of the chair, massaging
balm into her cracked red hands before bed. Clares low voice is in my ear often.
I hate to be where she is not, when she is not. And yet, I am always going, and she cannot
follow.
I
THE MAN OUT OF TIME
Oh not because happiness exists,
that too-hasty profit snatched from approaching loss.
But because truly being here is so much; because everything here
apparently needs us, this fleeting world, which in some strange way
keeps calling to us. Us, the most fleeting of all.
...Ah, but what can we take along
into that other realm? Not the art of looking,
which is learned so slowly, and nothing that happened here. Nothing.
The sufferings, then. And, above all, the heaviness,
and the long experience of love,just what is wholly
unsayable.
 from The Ninth Duino Elegy,
Rainer Maria Rilke,
translated by Stephen Mitchell
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
8
FIRST DATE, ONE
Saturday, October 26, 1991 (Henry is 28, Clare is 20)
CLARE: The library is cool and smells like carpet cleaner, although all I can see is marble. I
sign the Visitors Log: Clare Abshire, 11:15 10-26-91 Special Collections. I have never been
in the Newberry Library before, and now that Ive gotten past the dark, foreboding entrance I
am excited. I have a sort of Christmas-morning sense of the library as a big box full of
beautiful books. The elevator is dimly lit, almost silent. I stop on the third floor and fill out
an application for a Readers Card, then I go upstairs to Special Collections. My boot heels
rap the wooden floor. The room is quiet and crowded, full of solid, heavy tables piled with
books and surrounded by readers. Chicago autumn morning light shines through the tall
windows. I approach the desk and collect a stack of call slips. Im writing a paper for an art
history class. My research topic is the Kelmscott Press Chaucer. I look up the book itself and
fill out a call slip for it. But I also want to read about papermaking at Kelmscott. The catalog
is confusing. I go back to the desk to ask for help. As I explain to the woman what I am
trying to find, she glances over my shoulder at someone passing behind me. Perhaps Mr.
DeTamble can help you, she says. I turn, prepared to start explaining again, and find myself
face to face with Henry.
I am speechless. Here is Henry, calm, clothed, younger than I have ever seen him. Henry
is working at the Newberry Library, standing in front of me, in the present. Here and now. I
am jubilant. Henry is looking at me patiently, uncertain but polite.
Is there something I can help you with? he asks.
Henry! I can barely refrain from throwing my arms around him. It is obvious that he has
never seen me before in his life.
Have we met? Im sorry, I dont... Henry is glancing around us, worrying that readers,
co-workers are noticing us, searching his memory and realizing that some future self of his
has met this radiantly happy girl standing in front of him. The last time I saw him he was
sucking my toes in the Meadow.
I try to explain. Im Clare Abshire. I knew you when I was a little girl.,. Im at a loss
because I am in love with a man who is standing before me with no memories of me at all.
Everything is in the future for him. I want to laugh at the weirdness of the whole thing. Im
flooded with years of knowledge of Henry, while hes looking at me perplexed and fearful.
Henry wearing my dads old fishing trousers, patiently quizzing me on multiplication tables,
French verbs, all the state capitals; Henry laughing at some peculiar lunch my seven-year-old
self has brought to the Meadow; Henry wearing a tuxedo, undoing the studs of his shirt with
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
9
shaking hands on my eighteenth birthday. Here! Now! Come and have coffee with me, or
dinner or something... Surely he has to say yes, this Henry who loves me in the past and the
future must love me now in some bat-squeak echo of other time. To my immense relief he
does say yes. We plan to meet tonight at a nearby Thai restaurant, all the while under the
amazed gaze of the woman behind the desk, and I leave, forgetting about Kelmscott and
Chaucer and floating down the marble stairs, through the lobby and out into the October
Chicago sun, running across the park scattering small dogs and squirrels, whooping and
rejoicing.
HENRY: Its a routine day in October, sunny and crisp. Im at work in a small windowless
humidity-controlled room on the fourth floor of the Newberry, cataloging a collection of
marbled papers that has recently been donated, The papers are beautiful, but cataloging is
dull, and I am feeling bored and sorry for myself. In fact, I am feeling old, in the way only a
twenty-eight-year-old can after staying up half the night drinking overpriced vodka and
trying, without success, to win himself back into the good graces of Ingrid Carmichel. We
spent the entire evening fighting, and now I cant even remember what we were fighting
about. My head is throbbing. I need coffee. Leaving the marbled papers in a state of
controlled chaos, I walk through the office and past the pages desk in the Reading Room. I
am halted by Isabelles voice saying, Perhaps Mr. DeTamble can help you, by which she
means Henry, you weasel, where are you slinking off to? And this astoundingly beautiful
amber-haired tall slim girl turns around and looks at me as though I am her personal Jesus.
My stomach lurches. Obviously she knows me, and I dont know her. Lord only knows what
I have said, done, or promised to this luminous creature, so I am forced to say in my best
librarianese, Is there something I can help you with? The girl sort of breathes Henry! in
this very evocative way that convinces me that at some point in time we have a really
amazing thing together. This makes it worse that I dont know anything about her, not even
her name. I say Have we met? and Isabelle gives me a look that says You asshole. But the
girl says, Im Clare Abshire. I knew you when I was a little girl, and invites me out to
dinner. I accept, stunned. She is glowing at me, although I am unshaven and hung over and
just not at my best. We are going to meet for dinner this very evening, at the Beau Thai, and
Clare, having secured me for later, wafts out of the Reading Room.
As I stand in the elevator, dazed, I realize that a massive winning lottery ticket chunk of
my future has somehow found me here in the present, and I start to laugh. I cross the lobby,
and as I run down the stairs to the street I see Clare running across Washington Square,
jumping and whooping, and I am near tears and I dont know why.
Later that evening:
HENRY: At 6:00 p.m. I race home from work and attempt to make myself attractive. Home
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
10
these days is a tiny but insanely expensive studio apartment on North Dearborn; I am
constantly banging parts of myself on inconvenient walls, countertops and furniture. Step
One: unlock seventeen locks on apartment door, fling myself into the living room-which-isalso-my-bedroom
and begin stripping off clothing. Step Two: shower and shave. Step Three:
stare hopelessly into the depths of my closet, gradually becoming aware that nothing is
exactly clean. I discover one white shirt still in its dry cleaning bag. I decide to wear the
black suit, wing tips, and pale blue tie. Step Four: don all of this and realize I look like an
FBI agent. Step Five: look around and realize that the apartment is a mess. I resolve to avoid
bringing Clare to my apartment tonight even if such a thing is possible. Step Six: look in fulllength
bathroom mirror and behold angular, wild-eyed 61 ten-year-old Egon Schiele lookalike
in clean shirt and funeral director suit. I wonder what sorts of outfits this woman has
seen me wearing, since I am obviously not arriving from my future into her past wearing
clothes of my own. She said she was a little girl? A plethora of unanswerables runs through
my head. I stop and breathe for a minute. Okay. I grab my wallet and my keys, and away I
go: lock the thirty-seven locks, descend in the cranky little elevator, buy roses for Clare in
the shop in the lobby, walk two blocks to the restaurant in record time but still five minutes
late. Clare is already seated in a booth and she looks relieved when she sees me. She waves
at me like shes in a parade.
Hello, I say. Clare is wearing a wine-colored velvet dress and pearls. She looks like a
Botticelli by way of John Graham: huge gray eyes, long nose, tiny delicate mouth like a
geisha. She has long red hair that covers her shoulders and falls to the middle of her back.
Clare is so pale she looks like a waxwork in the candlelight. I thrust the roses at her. For
you.
Thank you, says Clare, absurdly pleased. She looks at me and realizes that I am
confused by her response. Youve never given me flowers before.
I slide into the booth opposite her. Im fascinated. This woman knows me; this isnt some
passing acquaintance of my future hejiras. The waitress appears and hands us menus.
Tell me, I demand.
What?
Everything. I mean, do you understand why I dont know you? Im terribly sorry about
that
Oh, no, you shouldnt be. I mean, I know.. .why that is. Clare lowers her voice. Its
because for you none of it has happened yet, but for me, well, Ive known you for a long
time.
How long?
About fourteen years. I first saw you when I was six.
Jesus. Have you seen me very often? Or just a few times?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
11
The last time I saw you, you told me to bring this to dinner when we met again, Clare
shows me a pale blue childs diary, so here,she hands it to meyou can have this. I
open it to the place marked with a piece of newspaper. The page, which has two cocker
spaniel puppies lurking in the upper right-hand corner, is a list of dates. It begins with
September 23, 1977, and ends sixteen small, blue, puppied pages later on May 24, 1989. I
count. There are 152 dates, written with great care in the large open Palmer Method blue ball
point pen of a six-year-old.
You made the list? These are all accurate?
Actually, you dictated this to me. You told me a few years ago that you memorized the
dates from this list. So I dont know how exactly this exists; I mean, it seems sort of like a
Mobius strip. But they are accurate. I used them to know when to go down to the Meadow to
meet you. The waitress reappears and we order: Tom Kha Kai for me and Gang Mussaman
for Clare. A waiter brings tea and I pour us each a cup.
What is the Meadow? I am practically hopping with excitement. I have never met
anyone from my future before, much less a Botticelli who has encountered me 152 times.
The Meadow is a part of my parents place up in Michigan. Theres woods at one edge
of it, and the house on the opposite end. More or less in the middle is a clearing about ten
feet in diameter with a big rock in it, and if youre in the clearing no one at the house can see
you because the land swells up and then dips in the clearing. I used to play there because I
liked to play by myself and I thought no one knew I was there. One day when I was in first
grade I came home from school and went out to the clearing and there you were.
Stark naked and probably throwing up.
Actually, you seemed pretty self-possessed. I remember you knew my name, and I
remember you vanishing quite spectacularly. In retrospect, its obvious that you had been
there before. I think the first time for you was in 1981; I was ten. You kept saying Oh my
god, and staring at me. Also, you seemed pretty freaked out about the nudity, and by then I
just kind of took it for granted that this old nude guy was going to magically appear from the
future and demand clothing. Clare smiles. And food.
Whats funny?
I made you some pretty weird meals over the years. Peanut butter and anchovy
sandwiches. Pate and beets on Ritz crackers. I think partly I wanted to see if there was
anything you wouldnt eat and partly I was trying to impress you with my culinary
wizardry.
How old was I?
I think the oldest I have seen you was forty-something. Im not sure about youngest;
maybe about thirty? How old are you now?
Twenty-eight.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
12
You look very young to me now. The last few years you were mostly in your early
forties, and you seemed to be having kind of a rough life... Its hard to say. When youre
little all adults seem big, and old.
So what did we do? In the Meadow? Thats a lot of time, there.
Clare smiles. We did lots of things. It changed depending on my age, and the weather.
You spent a lot of time helping me do my homework. We played games. Mostly we just
talked about stuff. When I was really young I thought you were an angel; I asked you a lot of
questions about God. When I was a teenager I tried to get you to make love to me, and you
never would, which of course made me much more determined about it. I think you thought
you were going to warp me sexually, somehow. In some ways you were very parental.
Oh. Thats probably good news but somehow at the moment I dont seem to be wanting
to be thought of as parental. Our eyes meet. We both smile and we are conspirators. What
about winter? Michigan winters are pretty extreme.
I used to smuggle you into our basement; the house has a huge basement with several
rooms, and one of them is a storage room and the furnace is on the other side of the wall. We
call it the Reading Room because all the useless old books and magazines are stored there.
One time you were down there and we had a blizzard and nobody went to school or to work
and I thought I was going to go crazy trying to get food for you because there wasnt all that
much food in the house. Etta was supposed to go grocery shopping when the storm hit. So
you were stuck reading old Readers Digests for three days, living on sardines and ramen
noodles.
Sounds salty. Ill look forward to it. Our meal arrives. Did you ever learn to cook?
No, I dont think I would claim to know how to cook. Nell and Etta always got mad
when I did anything in their kitchen beyond getting myself a Coke, and since Ive moved to
Chicago I dont have anybody to cook for, so I havent been motivated to work on it. Mostly
Im too busy with school and all, sol just eat there. Clare takes a bite of her curry. This is
really good.
Nell and Etta?
Nell is our cook. Clare smiles. Nell is like cordon bleu meets Detroit; shes how
Aretha Franklin would be if she was Julia Child. Etta is our housekeeper and all-around
everything. Shes really more almost our mom; I mean, my mother is...well, Ettas just
always there, and shes German and strict, but shes very comforting, and my mother is kind
of off in the clouds, you know?
I nod, my mouth full of soup.
Oh, and theres Peter, Clare adds. Peter is the gardener.
Wow. Your family has servants. This sounds a little out of my league. Have I ever, uh,
met any of your family?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
13
You met my Grandma Meagram right before she died. She was the only person I ever
told about you. She was pretty much blind by then. She knew we were going to get married
and she wanted to meet you.
I stop eating and look at Clare. She looks back at me, serene, angelic, perfectly at ease.
Are we going to get married?
I assume so, she replies. Youve been telling me for years that whenever it is youre
coming from, youre married to me.
Too much. This is too much. I close my eyes and will myself to think of nothing; the last
thing I want is to lose my grip on the here and now.
Henry? Henry, are you okay? I feel Clare sliding onto the seat beside me. I open my
eyes and she grips my hands strongly in hers. I look at her hands and see that they are the
hands of a laborer, rough and chapped.
Henry, Im sorry, I just cant get used to this. Its so opposite. I mean, all my life youve
been the one who knew everything and I sort of forgot that tonight maybe I should go slow.
She smiles. Actually, almost the last thing you said to me before you left was Have mercy,
Clare. You said it in your quoting voice, and I guess now that I think of it you must have
been quoting me. She continues to hold my hands. She looks at me with eagerness; with
love. I feel profoundly humble.
Clare?
Yes?
Could we back up? Could we pretend that this is a normal first date between two normal
people?
Okay. Clare gets up and goes back to her side of the table. She sits up straight and tries
not to smile.
Um, right. Gee, ah, Clare, ah, tell me about yourself. Hobbies? Pets? Unusual sexual
proclivities?
Find out for yourself.
Right. Lets see.. .where do you go to school? What are you studying?
Im at the School of the Art Institute; Ive been doing sculpture, and Ive just started to
study papermaking.
Cool. Whats your work like?
For the first time, Clare seems uncomfortable. Its kind of...big, and its about.. .birds.
She looks at the table, then takes a sip of tea.
Birds?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
14
Well, really its about, um, longing. She is still not looking at me, so I change the
subject.
Tell more about your family.
Okay. Clare relaxes, smiles. Well...my family lives in Michigan, by a small town on
the lake called South Haven. Our house is in an unincorporated area outside the town,
actually. It originally belonged to my mothers parents, my Grandpa and Grandma Meagram.
He died before I was born, and she lived with us until she died. I was seventeen. My grandpa
was a lawyer, and my dad is a lawyer; my dad met my mom when he came to work for
Grandpa.
So he married the bosss daughter.
Yeah. Actually, I sometimes wonder if he really married the bosss house. My mom is an
only child, and the house is sort of amazing; its in a lot of books on the Arts and Crafts
movement.
Does it have a name? Who built it?
Its called Meadowlark House, and it was built in 1896 by Peter Wyns.
Wow. Ive seen pictures of it. It was built for one of the Henderson family, right?
Yes. It was a wedding present for Mary Henderson and Dieter Bascombe. They divorced
two years after they moved in and sold the house.
Posh house.
My family is posh. Theyre very weird about it, too.
Brothers and sisters?
Mark is twenty-two and finishing pre-law at Harvard. Alicia is seventeen and a senior in
high school. Shes a cellist. I detect affection for the sister and a certain flatness for the
brother. You arent too fond of your brother?
Mark is just like Dad. They both like to win, talk you down until you submit.
You know, I always envy people with siblings, even if they dont like them all that
much,
Youre an only child?
Yep. I thought you knew everything about me?
Actually I know everything and nothing. I know how you look without clothes, but until
this afternoon I didnt know your last name. I knew you lived in Chicago, but I know nothing
about your family except that your mom died in a car crash when you were six. I know you
know a lot about art and speak fluent French and German; I had no idea you were a librarian.
You made it impossible for me to find you in the present; you said it would just happen when
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
15
it was supposed to happen, and here we are.
Here we are, I agree. Well, my family isnt posh; theyre musicians. My father is
Richard DeTamble and my mother was Annette Lyn Robinson.
Ohthe singer!
Right. And hes a violinist. He plays for the Chicago Symphony Orchestra. But he never
really made it the way she did. Its a shame because my father is a marvelous violin player.
After Mom died he was just treading water. The check arrives. Neither of us has eaten very
much, but I at least am not interested in food right now. Clare picks up her purse and I shake
my head at her. I pay; we leave the restaurant and stand on Clark Street in the fine autumn
night. Clare is wearing an elaborate blue knitted thing and a fur scarf; I have forgotten to
bring an overcoat so Im shivering.
Where do you live? Clare asks.
Uh oh. I live about two blocks from here, but my place is tiny and really messy right
now. You?
Roscoe Village, on Hoyne. But I have a roommate.
If you come up to my place you have to close your eyes and count to one thousand.
Perhaps you have a very uninquisitive deaf roommate?
No such luck. I never bring anyone over; Charisse would pounce on you and stick
bamboo slivers under your fingernails until you told all.
I long to be tortured by someone named Charisse, but I can see that you do not share my
taste. Come up to my parlor. We walk north along Clark. I veer into Clark Street Liquors for
a bottle of wine. Back on the street Clare is puzzled.
I thought you arent supposed to drink? I m not?
Dr. Kendrick was very strict about it.
Whos he? We are walking slowly because Clare is wearing impractical shoes.
Hes your doctor; hes a big expert on Chrono-Impairment.
Explain.
I dont know very much. Dr. David Kendrick is a molecular geneticist who discovered
will discover why people are chrono-impaired. Its a genetic thing; he figures it out in 2006.
She sighs. I guess its just way too early. You told me once that there are a lot more chronoimpaired
people about ten years from now.
Ive never heard of anyone else who has thisimpairment.
I guess even if you went out right now and found Dr. Kendrick he wouldnt be able to
help you. And we would never have met, if he could.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
16
Lets not think about that. We are in my lobby. Clare precedes me into the tiny elevator.
I close the door and push eleven. She smells like old cloth, soap, sweat, and fur. I breathe
deeply. The elevator clangs into place on my floor and we extricate ourselves from it and
walk down the narrow hallway. I wield my fistful of keys on all 107 locks and crack the door
slightly. Its gotten much worse during dinner. Im going to have to blindfold you. Clare
giggles as I set down the wine and remove my tie. I pass it over her eyes and tie it firmly at
the back of her head. I open the door and guide her into the apartment and settle her in the
armchair. Okay, start counting.
Clare counts. I race around picking underwear and socks from the floor, collecting spoons
and coffee cups from various horizontal surfaces and chucking them into the kitchen sink. As
she says Nine hundred and sixty-seven, I remove the tie from her eyes. I have turned the
sleeper-sofa into its daytime, sofa self, and I sit down on it. Wine? Music? Candlelight?
Yes, please.
I get up and light candles. When Im finished I turn off the overhead light and the room is
dancing with little lights and everything looks better. I put the roses in water, locate my
corkscrew, extract the cork, and pour us each a glass of wine. After a moments thought I put
on the EMI CD of my mother singing Schubert lieder and turn the volume low.
My apartment is basically a couch, an armchair, and about four thousand books.
How lovely, says Clare. She gets up and reseats herself on the sofa. I sit down next to
her. There is a comfortable moment when we just sit there and look at each other. The
candlelight flickers on Clares hair. She reaches over and touches my cheek. Its so good to
see you. I was getting lonely.
I draw her to me. We kiss. Its a very.. .compatible kiss, a kiss born of long association,
and I wonder just exactly what weve been doing in this meadow of Clares, but I push the
thought away. Our lips part; usually at this point I would be considering how to work my
way past various fortresses of clothing, but instead I lean back and stretch out on the sofa,
bringing Clare along with me by gripping her under the arms and pulling; the velvet dress
makes her slippery and she slithers into the space between my body and the back of the sofa
like a velvet eel. She is facing me and I am propped up by the arm of the sofa. I can feel the
length of her body pressing against mine through the thin fabric. Part of me is dying to go
leaping and licking and diving in, but Im exhausted and overwhelmed.
Poor Henry.
Why Poor Henry? Im overcome with happiness. And its true.
Oh, Ive been dropping all these surprises on you like big rocks. Clare swings a leg over
me so shes sitting exactly on top of my cock. It concentrates my attention wonderfully.
Dont move, I say.
Okay. Im finding this evening highly entertaining. I mean, Knowledge is Power, and all
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
17
that. Also Ive always been hugely curious to find out where you live and what you wear and
what you do for a living.
 Voila! I slide my hands under her dress and up her thighs. Shes bearing stockings and
garters. My kind of girl. Clare?
Oui.
It seems like a shame to just gobble everything up all at once. I mean, a little anticipation
wouldnt hurt anything.
Clare is abashed. Im sorry! But, you know, in my case, Ive been anticipating for years.
And, its not like cake.. .you eat it and its gone.
Have your cake and eat it too.
Thats my motto. She smiles a tiny wicked smile and thrusts her hips back and forth a
couple times. I now have an erection that is probably tall enough to ride some of the scarier
rides at Great America without a parent.
You get your way a lot, dont you?
Always. Im horrible. Except you have been mostly impervious to my wheedling ways.
Ive suffered dreadfully under your regime of French verbs and checkers.
I guess I should take consolation in the fact that my future self will at least have some
weapons of subjugation. Do you do this to all the boys?
Clare is offended; I cant tell how genuinely. I wouldnt dream of doing this with boys.
What nasty ideas you have! She is unbuttoning my shirt. God, youre so...young. She
pinches my nipples, hard. The hell with virtue. Ive figured out the mechanics of her dress.
The next morning:
CLARE: I wake up and I dont know where I am. An unfamiliar ceiling. Distant traffic noises.
Bookshelves. A blue armchair with my velvet dress slung across it and a mans tie draped
over the dress. Then I remember. I turn my head and theres Henry. So simple, as though
Ive been doing it all my life. He is sleeping with abandon, torqued into an unlikely shape as
though hes washed up on some beach, one arm over his eyes to shut out the morning, his
long black hair splayed over the pillow. So simple. Here we are. Here and now, finally now.
I get out of bed carefully. Henrys bed is also his sofa. The springs squeak as I stand up.
Theres not much space between the bed and the bookshelves, so I edge along until I make it
into the hallway. The bathroom is tiny. I feel like Alice in Wonderland, grown huge and
having to stick my arm out the window just so I can turn around. The ornate little radiator is
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
18
clanking out heat. I pee and wash my hands and my face. And then I notice that there are two
toothbrushes in the white porcelain toothbrush holder.
I open the medicine cabinet. Razors, shaving cream, Listerine, Tylenol, aftershave, a blue
marble, a toothpick, deodorant on the top shelf. Hand lotion, tampons, a diaphragm case,
deodorant, lipstick, a bottle of multivitamins, a tube of spermicide on the bottom shelf. The
lipstick is a very dark red.
I stand there, holding the lipstick. I feel a little sick. I wonder what she looks like, what
her name is. I wonder how long theyve been going out. Long enough, I guess. I put the
lipstick back, close the medicine cabinet. In the mirror I see myself, white-faced, hair flying
in all directions. Well, whoever you are, Im here now. You may be Henrys past, but Im his
future. I smile at myself. My reflection grimaces back at me. I borrow Henrys white
terrycloth bathrobe from the back of the bathroom door. Underneath it on the hook is a pale
blue silk robe. For no reason at all wearing his bathrobe makes me feel better.
Back in the living room, Henry is still sleeping. I retrieve my watch from the windowsill
and see that its only 6:30. Im too restless to get back into bed. I walk into the kitchenette in
search of coffee. All the counters and the stove are covered with stacks of dishes, magazines,
and other reading material. Theres even a sock in the sink. I realize that Henry must have
simply heaved everything into the kitchen last night, regardless. I always had this idea that
Henry was very tidy. Now it becomes clear that hes one of those people who is fastidious
about his personal appearance but secretly slovenly about everything else. I find coffee in the
fridge, and find the coffee maker, and start the coffee. While I wait for it to brew, I peruse
Henrys bookshelves.
Here is the Henry I know. Donnes Elegies and Songs and Sonnets. Doctor Faustus, by
Christopher Marlowe. Naked Lunch. Anne Bradstreet, Immanuel Kant. Barthes, Foucault,
Derrida. Blakes Songs of Innocence and Experience. Winnie the Pooh. The Annotated Alice.
Heidegger. Rilke. Tristram Shandy. Wisconsin Death Trip. Aristotle. Bishop Berkeley.
Andrew Marvell. Hypothermia, Frostbite and Other Cold Injuries.
The bed squeaks and I jump. Henry is sitting up, squinting at me in the morning light.
Hes so young, so before. He doesnt know me, yet. I have a sudden fear that hes
forgotten who I am.
You look cold he says. Come back to bed, Clare.
I made coffee, I offer.
Mmm, I can smell it. But first come and say good morning.
I climb into bed still wearing his bathrobe. As he slides his hand under it he stops for just
a moment, and I see that he has made the connection, and is mentally reviewing his bathroom
vis-a-vis me.
Does it bother you? he asks.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
19
I hesitate.
Yes, it does. It does bother you. Of course. Henry sits up, and I do, too. He turns his
head toward me, looks at me. It was almost over, anyway.
Almost?
I was about to break up with her. Its just bad timing. Or good timing, I dont know.
Hes trying to read my face, for what? Forgiveness? Its not his fault. How could he know?
Weve sort of been torturing each other for a long time Hes talking faster and faster and
then he stops. Do you want to know? No.
Thank you. Henry passes his hands over his face. Im sorry. I didnt know you were
coming or Id have cleaned up a little more. My life, I mean, not just the apartment. Theres
a lipstick smear under Henrys ear, and I reach up and rub it out. He takes my hand, and
holds it. Am I very different? Than you expected? he asks apprehensively.
Yes...youre more... selfish, I think, but I say, ...younger.
He considers it. Is that good or bad?
Different. I run both hands over Henrys shoulders and across his back, massaging
muscles, exploring indentations. Have you seen yourself, in your forties?
Yes. I look like Ive been spindled and mutilated.
Yeah. But youre lessI mean you are sort ofmore. I mean, you know me, so....
So right now youre telling me that Im somewhat gauche.
I shake my head, although that is exactly what I mean. Its just that Ive had all these
experiences, and you...Im not used to being with you when you dont remember anything
that happened.
Henry is somber. Im sorry. But the person you know doesnt exist yet. Stick with me,
and sooner or later, hes bound to appear. Thats the best I can do, though.
Thats fair, I say. But in the meantime...
He turns to meet my gaze. In the meantime?
I want...
You want?
Im blushing. Henry smiles, and pushes me backward gently onto the pillows. You
know.
I dont know much, but I can guess a thing or two.
Later, were dozing warm covered with midmorning October pale sun, skin to skin and
Henry says something into the back of my neck that I dont catch.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
20
What?
I was thinking; its very peaceful, here with you. Its nice to just lie here and know that
the future is sort of taken care of.
Henry?
Hmm?
How come you never told yourself about me?
Oh. I dont do that.
Do what?
I dont usually tell myself stuff ahead of time unless its huge, life-threatening, you
know? Im trying to live like a normal person. I dont even like having myself around, so I
try not to drop in on myself unless theres no choice.
I ponder this for a while. I would tell myself everything.
No, you wouldnt. It makes a lot of trouble.
I was always trying to get you to tell me things. I roll over onto my back and Henry
props his head on his hand and looks down at me. Our faces are about six inches apart. Its so
strange to be talking, almost like we always did, but the physical proximity makes it hard for
me to concentrate.
Did I tell you things? he asks.
Sometimes. When you felt like it, or had to.
Like what?
See? You do want to know. But Im not telling.
Henry laughs. Serves me right. Hey, Im hungry. Lets go get breakfast.
Outside its chilly. Cars and cyclists cruise along Dearborn while couples stroll down the
sidewalks and there we are with them, in the morning sunlight, hand in hand, finally together
for anyone to see. I feel a tiny pang of regret, as though Ive lost a secret, and then a rush of
exaltation: now everything begins.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
21
A FIRST TIME FOR EVERYTHING
Sunday, June 16, 1968
HENRY: The first time was magical. How could I have known what it meant? It was my fifth
birthday, and we went to the Field Museum of Natural History. I dont think I had ever been
to the Field Museum before. My parents had been telling me all week about the wonders to
be seen there, the stuffed elephants in the great hall, the dinosaur skeletons, the caveman
dioramas. Mom had just gotten back from Sydney, and she had brought me an immense,
surpassingly blue butterfly, Papilio ulysses, mounted in a frame filled with cotton. I would
hold it close to my face, so close I couldnt see anything but that blue. It would fill me with a
feeling, a feeling I later tried to duplicate with alcohol and finally found again with Clare, a
feeling of unity, oblivion, mindlessness in the best sense of the word. My parents described
the cases and cases of butterflies, hummingbirds, beetles. I was so excited that I woke up
before dawn. I put on my gym shoes and took my Papilio ulysses and went into the backyard
and down the steps to the river in my pajamas. I sat on the landing and hatched the light
come up. A family of ducks came swimming by, and a raccoon appeared on the landing
across the river and looked at me curiously before washing its breakfast and eating it. I may
have fallen asleep. I heard Mom calling and I ran back up the stairs, which were slippery
with dew, careful not to drop the butterfly. She was annoyed with me for going down to the
landing by myself, but she didnt make a big deal about it, it being my birthday and all.
Neither of them were working that night, so they took their time getting dressed and out
the door. I was ready long before either of them. I sat on their bed and pretended to read a
score. This was around the time my musician parents recognized that their one and only
offspring was not musically gifted. It wasnt that I wasnt trying; I just could not hear
whatever it was they heard in a piece of music. I enjoyed music, but I could hardly carry a
tune. And though I could read a newspaper when I was four, scores were only pretty black
squiggles. But my parents were still hoping I might have some hidden musical aptitude, so
when I picked up the score Mom sat down next to me and tried to help me with it. Pretty
soon Mom was singing and I was chiming in with horrible yowling noises and snapping my
fingers and we were giggling and she was tickling me. Dad came out of the bathroom with a
towel around his waist and joined in and for a few glorious minutes they were singing
together and Dad picked me up and they were dancing around the bedroom with me pressed
between them. Then the phone rang, and the scene dissolved. Mom went to answer it, and
Dad set me on the bed and got dressed.
Finally, they were ready. My mom wore a red sleeveless dress and sandals; she had
painted her toenails and fingernails so they matched her dress. Dad was resplendent in dark
blue pants and a white short-sleeved shirt, providing a quiet background for Moms
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
22
flamboyance. We all piled into the car. As always, I had the whole backseat to myself, so I
lay down and watched the tall buildings along Lake Shore Drive flicking past the window.
Sit up, Henry said Mom. Were here.
I sat up and looked at the museum. I had spent my childhood thus far being carted around
the capital cities of Europe, so the Field Museum satisfied my idea of Museum, but its
domed stone facade was nothing exceptional. Because it was Sunday, we had a little trouble
finding parking, but eventually we parked and walked along the lake, past boats and statues
and other excited children. We passed between the heavy columns and into the museum.
And then I was a boy enchanted.
Here all of nature was captured, labeled, arranged according to a logic that seemed as
timeless as if ordered by God, perhaps a God who had mislaid the original paperwork on the
Creation and had requested the Field Museum staff to help Him out and keep track of it all.
For my five-year-old self, who could derive rapture from a single butterfly, to walk through
the Field Museum was to walk through Eden and see all that passed there.
We saw so much that day: the butterflies, to be sure, cases and cases of them, from Brazil,
from Madagascar, even a brother of my blue butterfly from Down Under. The museum was
dark, cold, and old, and this heightened the sense of suspension, of time and death brought to
a halt inside its walls. We saw crystals and cougars, muskrats and mummies, fossils and
more fossils. We ate our picnic lunch on the lawn of the museum, and then plunged in again
for birds and alligators and Neanderthals. Toward the end I was so tired I could hardly stand,
but I couldnt bear to leave. The guards came and gently herded us all to the doors; I
struggled not to cry, but began to anyway, out of exhaustion and desire. Dad picked me up,
and we walked back to the car. I fell asleep in the backseat, and when I awoke We were
home, and it was time for dinner.
We ate downstairs in Mr. and Mrs. Kims apartment. They were our landlords. Mr. Kim
was a gruff, compact man who seemed to like me but never said much, and Mrs. Kim (Kimy,
my nickname for her) was my buddy, my crazy Korean card-playing babysitter. I spent most
of my waking hours with Kimy. My mom was never much of a cook, and Kimy could
produce anything from a souffl to bi him bop with panache. Tonight, for my birthday, she
had made pizza and chocolate cake.
We ate. Everyone sang Happy Birthday and I blew out the candles. I dont remember
what I wished for. I was allowed to stay up later than usual, because I was still excited by all
the things wed seen, and because I had slept so late in the afternoon. I sat on the back porch
in my pajamas with Mom and Dad and Mrs. and Mr. Kim, drinking lemonade and watching
the blueness of the evening sky, listening to the cicadas and the TV noises from other
apartments. Eventually Dad said, Bedtime, Henry. I brushed my teeth and said prayers and
got into bed. I was exhausted but wide awake. Dad read to me for a while, and then, seeing
that I still couldnt sleep, he and Mom turned out the lights, propped open my bedroom door,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
23
and went into the living room. The deal was: they would play for me as long as I wanted, but
I had to stay in bed to listen. So Mom sat at the piano, and Dad got out his violin, and they
played and sang for a long time. Lullabies, lieder, nocturnes; sleepy music to soothe the
savage boy in the bedroom. Finally Mom came in to see if I was asleep. I must have looked
small and wary in my little bed, a nocturnal animal in pajamas.
Oh, baby. Still awake?
I nodded.
Dad and I are going to bed. Are you okay?
I said Yes and she gave me a hug. It was pretty exciting today at the museum, huh?
Can we go back tomorrow?
Not tomorrow, but well go back real soon, okay? Okay.
Gnight. She left the door open and flipped off the hall light. Sleep tight. Dont let the
bedbugs bite.
I could hear little noises, water running, toilet flushing. Then all was quiet. I got out of
bed and knelt in front of my window. I could see lights in the house next door, and
somewhere a car drove by with its radio blaring. I stayed there for a while, trying to feel
sleepy, and then I stood up and everything changed.
Saturday, January 2, 1988, 4:03 a.m. /Sunday, June 16, 1968, 10:46 p.m.
(Henry is 24, and 5)
HENRY: Its 4:03 a.m. on a supremely cold January morning and Im just getting home. Ive
been out dancing and Im only half drunk but utterly exhausted. As I fumble with my keys in
the bright foyer I fall to my knees, dizzy and nauseated, and then I am in the dark, vomiting
on a tile floor. I raise my head and see a red illuminated EXIT sign and as my eyes adjust I see
tigers, cavemen with long spears, cavewomen wearing strategically modest skins, wolfish
dogs. My heart is racing and for a long liquor-addled moment I think Holy shit, Ive gone all
the way back to the Stone Age until I realize that EXIT signs tend to congregate in the
twentieth century. I get up, shaking, and venture toward the doorway, tile icy under my bare
feet, gooseflesh and all my hairs standing up. Its absolutely silent. The air is clammy with
air conditioning. I reach the entrance and look into the next room. Its full of glass cases; the
white streetlight glow through the high windows shows me thousands of beetles. Im in the
Field Museum, praise the Lord. I stand still and breathe deeply, trying to clear my head.
Something about this rings a bell in my fettered brain and I try to dredge it up. Im supposed
to do something. Yes. My fifth birthday... someone was there, and Im about to be that
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
24
someone...I need clothes. Yes. Indeed.
I sprint through beetlemania into the long hallway that bisects the second floor, down the
west staircase to the first floor, grateful to be in the pre-motion-detector era. The great
elephants loom menacingly over me in the moonlight and I wave to them on my way to the
little gift shop to the right of the main entrance. I circle the wares and find a few promising
items: an ornamental letter opener, a metal bookmark with the Fields insignia, and two Tshirts
that feature dinosaurs. The locks on the cases are a joke; I pop them with a bobby pin I
find next to the cash register, and help myself. Okay. Back up the stairs, to the third floor.
This is the Fields attic, where the labs are; the staff have their offices up here. I scan the
names on the doors, but none of them suggests anything to me; finally I select at random and
slide my bookmark along the lock until the catch pushes back and Im in.
The occupant of this office is one V. M. Williamson, and hes a very untidy guy. The
room is dense with papers, and coffee cups and cigarettes overflow from ashtrays; theres a
partially articulated snake skeleton on his desk. I quickly case the joint for clothes and come
up with nothing. The next office belongs to a woman, J. F. Bettley. On the third try I get
lucky. D. W. Fitch has an entire suit hung neatly on his coat rack, and it pretty much fits me,
though its a bit short in the arms and legs and wide in the lapels. I wear one of the dinosaur
T-shirts under the jacket. No shoes, but Im decent. D. W. also keeps an unopened package
of Oreo cookies in his desk, bless him. I appropriate them and leave, closing the door
carefully behind me.
Where was I, when I saw me? I close my eyes and fatigue takes me bodily, caressing me
with her sleepy fingers. I am almost out on my feet, but I catch myself and it comes to me: a
man in silhouette walking toward me backlit by the museums front doors. I need to get back
to the Great Hall.
When I get there all is quiet and still. I walk across the middle of the floor, trying to
replicate the view of the doors, and then I seat myself near the coat room, so as to enter stage
left. I can hear blood rushing in my head, the air conditioning system humming, cars
whooshing by on Lake Shore Drive. I eat ten Oreos, slowly, gently prying each one apart,
scraping the filling out with my front teeth, nibbling the chocolate halves to make them last. I
have no idea what time it is, or how long I have to wait. Im mostly sober now, and
reasonably alert. Time passes, nothing happens. At last: I hear a soft thud, a gasp. Silence. I
wait. I stand up, silently, and pad into the Hall, walking slowly through the light that slants
across the marble floor. I stand in the center of the doors and call out, not loud: Henry.
Nothing. Good boy, wary and silent. I try again. Its okay, Henry. Im your guide, Im
here to show you around. Its a special tour. Dont be afraid, Henry.
I hear a slight, oh-so-faint noise. I brought you a T-shirt, Henry. So you wont get cold
while we look at the exhibits. I can make him out now, standing at the edge of the darkness.
Here. Catch. I throw it to him, and the shirt disappears, and then he steps into the light. The
T-shirt comes down to his knees. Me at five, dark spiky hair, moon pale with brown almost
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
25
Slavic eyes, wiry, coltish. At five I am happy, cushioned in normality and the arms of my
parents. Everything changed, starting now.
I walk forward slowly, bend toward him, speak softly. Hello. Im glad to see you, Henry.
Thank you for coming tonight.
Where am I? Who are you? His voice is small and high, and echoes a little off the cold
stone.
Youre in the Field Museum. I have been sent here to show you some things you cant
see during the day. My name is also Henry. Isnt that funny?
He nods.
Would you like some cookies? I always like to eat cookies while I look around
museums. It makes it more multi-sensory. I offer him the package of Oreos. He hesitates,
unsure if its all right, hungry but unsure how many he can take without being rude. Take as
many as you want. Ive already eaten ten, so you have some catching up to do. He takes
three. Is there anything youd like to see first? He shakes his head. Tell you what. Lets
go up to the third floor; thats where they keep all the stuff that isnt on display. Okay?
Okay.
We walk through darkness, up the stairs. He isnt moving very fast, so I climb slowly with
him.
Wheres Mom?
Shes at home, sleeping. This is a special tour, only for you, because its your birthday.
Besides, grown-ups dont do this sort of thing.
Arent you a grown-up?
Im an extremely unusual grown-up. My job is to have adventures. So naturally when I
heard that you wanted to come back to the Field Museum right away, I jumped at the chance
to show you around.
But how did I get here? He stops at the top of the stairs and looks at me with total
confusion.
Well, thats a secret. If I tell you, you have to swear not to say anything to anyone.
Why?
Because they wouldnt believe you. You can tell Mom, or Kimy if you want, but thats
it. Okay?
Okay....
I kneel in front of him, my innocent self, look him in the eyes. Cross your heart and hope
to die?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
26
Uh-huh....
Okay. Heres how it is: you time traveled. You were in your bedroom, and all of a
sudden, poof! you are here, and its a little earlier in the evening, so we have plenty of time
to look at everything before you have to go home. He is silent and quizzical. Does that
make sense?
But...why?
Well, I havent figured that out yet. Ill let you know when I do. In the meantime, we
should be moving along. Cookie?
He takes one and we walk slowly down the corridor. I decide to experiment. Lets try
this one. I slide the bookmark along a door marked 306 and open it. When I flick on the
lights there are pumpkin-sized rocks all over the floor, whole and halved, craggy on the
outside and streaked with veins of metal inside. Ooh, look, Henry. Meteorites.
Whats meteorites?
Rocks that fall from outer space. He looks at me as though Im from outer space. Shall
we try another door? He nods. I close the meteorite room and try the door across the
corridor. This room is full of birds. Birds in simulated flight, birds perched eternally on
branches, bird heads, bird skins. I open one of the hundreds of drawers; it contains a dozen
glass tubes, each holding a tiny gold and black bird with its name wrapped around a foot.
Henrys eyes are the size of saucers. Do you want to touch one?
Uh-huh.
I remove the cotton wadding from the mouth of a tube and shake a goldfinch onto my
palm. It remains tube-shaped. Henry strokes its small head, lovingly. Its sleeping?
More or less. He looks at me sharply, distrusting my equivocation. I insert the finch
gently back into the tube, replace the cotton, replace the tube, shut the drawer. I am so tired.
Even the word sleep is a lure, a seduction. I lead the way out into the hall, and suddenly I
recollect what it was I loved about this night when I was little.
Hey, Henry. Lets go to the library. He shrugs. I walk, quickly now, and he runs to keep
up. The library is on the third floor, at the east end of the building. When we get there, I
stand for a minute, contemplating the locks. Henry looks at me, as though to say, Well, thats
that. I feel in my pockets, and find the letter opener. I wiggle the wooden handle off, and lo,
theres a nice long thin metal prong in there. I stick one half of it into the lock and feel
around. I can hear the tumblers springing, and when Im all the way back I stick in the other
half, use my bookmark on the other lock and presto, Open Sesame!
At last, my companion is suitably impressed. Howd you do that?
Its not that hard. Ill teach you another time. Entrez! I hold open the door and he walks
in. I flip on the lights and the Reading Room springs into being; heavy wooden tables and
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
27
chairs, maroon carpet, forbidding enormous Reference Desk. The Field Museums Library is
not designed to appeal to five-year-olds. Its a closed-stacks library, used by scientists and
scholars. There are bookcases lining the room, but they hold mostly leather-bound Victorian
science periodicals. The book Im after is in a huge glass and oak case by itself in the center
of the room. I spring the lock with my bobby pin and open the glass door. Really, the Field
ought to get more serious about security. I dont feel too terrible about doing this; after all,
Im a bona fide librarian, I do Show and Tells at the Newberry all the time. I walk behind the
Reference Desk and find a piece of felt and some support pads, and lay them out on the
nearest table. Then I close and carefully lift the book out of its case and onto the felt. I pull
out a chair. Here, stand on this so you can see better. He climbs up, and I open the book.
Its Audubons Birds of America, the deluxe, wonderful double-elephant folio thats
almost as tall as my young self. This copy is the finest in existence, and I have spent many
rainy afternoons admiring it. I open it to the first plate, and Henry smiles, and looks at me. 
Common Loon he reads. It looks like a duck.
Yeah, it does. I bet I can guess your favorite bird.
He shakes his head and smiles.
Whatll you bet?
He looks down at himself in the T-Rex T-shirt and shrugs. I know the feeling.
How about this: if I guess you get to eat a cookie, and if I cant guess you get to eat a
cookie?
He thinks it over and decides this would be a safe bet. I open the book to Flamingo.
Henry laughs.
Am I right?
Yes!
Its easy to be omniscient when youve done it all before. Okay, heres your cookie. And
I get one for being right. But we have to save them til were done looking at the book; we
wouldnt want to get crumbs all over the bluebirds, right?
Right! He sets the Oreo on the arm of the chair and we begin again at the beginning and
page slowly through the birds, so much more alive than the real thing in glass tubes down the
hall.
Heres a Great Blue Heron. Hes really big, bigger than a flamingo. Have you ever seen
a hummingbird? I saw some today!
Here in the museum?
Uh-huh.
Wait til you see one outsidetheyre like tiny helicopters, their wings go so fast you
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
28
just see a blur.... Turning each page is like making a bed, an enormous expanse of paper
slowly rises up and over. Henry stands attentively, waits each time for the new wonder, emits
small noises of pleasure for each Sandhill Crane, American Coot, Great Auk, Pileated
Woodpecker. When we come to the last plate, Snow Bunting, he leans down and touches the
page, delicately stroking the engraving. I look at him, look at the book, remember, this book,
this moment, the first book I loved, remember wanting to crawl into it and sleep.
You tired?
Uh-huh.
Should we go? Okay.
I close Birds of America, return it to its glass home, open it to
Flamingo, shut the case, lock it. Henry jumps off the chair and eats his Oreo. I return the
felt to the desk and push the chair in. Henry turns out the light, and we leave the library.
We wander, chattering amiably of things that fly and things that slither, and eating our
Oreos. Henry tells me about Mom and Dad and Mrs. Kim, who is teaching him to make
lasagna, and Brenda, whom I had forgotten about, my best pal when I was little until her
family moved to Tampa, Florida, about three months from now. We are standing in front of
Bushman, the legendary silverback gorilla, whose stuffed magnificence glowers at us from
his little marble stand in a first floor hallway, when Henry cries out, and staggers forward,
reaching urgently for me, and I grab him, and hes gone. The T-shirt is warm empty cloth in
my hands. I sigh, and walk upstairs to ponder the mummies for a while by myself. My young
self will be home now, climbing into bed. I remember, I remember. I woke up in the morning
and it was all a wonderful dream. Mom laughed and said that time travel sounded fun, and
she wanted to try it, too.
That was the first time.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
29
FIRST DATE, TWO
Friday, September 23, 1977 (Henry is 36, Clare is 6)
HENRY: Im in the Meadow, waiting. I wait slightly outside the clearing, naked, because the
clothes Clare keeps for me in a box under a stone are not there; the box isnt there either, so I
am thankful that the afternoon is fine, early September, perhaps, in some unidentified year. I
hunker down in the tall grass. I consider. The fact that there is no box full of clothes means
that I have arrived in a time before Clare and I have met. Perhaps Clare isnt even born yet.
This has happened before, and its a pain; I miss Clare and I spend the time hiding naked in
the Meadow, not daring to show myself in the neighborhood of Clares family. I think
longingly of the apple trees at the western edge of the Meadow. At this time of year there
ought to be apples, small and sour and munched by deer, but edible. I hear the screen door
slam and I peer above the grass. A child is running, pell mell, and as it comes down the path
through the waving grass my heart twists and Clare bursts into the clearing.
She is very young. She is oblivious; she is alone. She is still wearing her school uniform,
a hunter green jumper with a white blouse and knee socks with penny loafers, and she is
carrying a Marshall Fields shopping bag and a beach towel. Clare spreads the towel on the
ground and dumps out the contents of the bag: every imaginable kind of writing implement.
Old ballpoint pens, little stubby pencils from the library, crayons, smelly Magic Markers, a
fountain pen. She also has a bunch of her dads office stationery. She arranges the
implements and gives the stack of paper a smart shake, and then proceeds to try each pen and
pencil in turn, making careful lines and swirls, humming to herself. After listening carefully
for a while I identify her humming as the theme song of The Dick Van Dyke Show.
I hesitate. Clare is content, absorbed. She must be about six; if its September she has
probably just entered first grade. Shes obviously not waiting for me, Im a stranger, and Im
sure that the first thing you learn in first grade is not to have any truck with strangers who
show up naked in your favorite secret spot and know your name and tell you not to tell your
mom and dad. I wonder if today is the day we are supposed to meet for the first time or if its
some other day. Maybe I should be very silent and either Clare will go away and I can go
munch up those apples and steal some laundry or I will revert to my regularly scheduled
programming, I snap from my reverie to find Clare staring straight at me. I realize, too late,
that I have been humming along with her.
Whos there? Clare hisses. She looks like a really pissed off goose, all neck and legs. I
am thinking fast,
Greetings, Earthling, I intone, kindly.
Mark! You nimrod! Clare is casting around for something to throw, and decides on her
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
30
shoes, which have heavy, sharp heels. She whips them off and does throw them. I dont think
she can see me very well, but she lucks out and one of them catches me in the mouth. My lip
starts to bleed.
Please dont do that. I dont have anything to staunch the blood, so I press my hand to
my mouth and my voice comes out muffled. My jaw hurts.
Who is it? Now Clare is frightened, and so am I.
Henry. Its Henry, Clare. I wont hurt you, and I wish you wouldnt throw anything else
at me.
Give me back my shoes. I dont know you. Why are you hiding? Clare is glowering at
me.
I toss her shoes back into the clearing. She picks them up and stands holding them like
pistols. Im hiding because I lost my clothes and Im embarrassed. I came a long way and
Im hungry and I dont know anybody and now Im bleeding.
Where did you come from? Why do you know my name?
The whole truth and nothing but the truth. I came from the future. I am a time traveler. In
the future we are friends.
People only time travel in movies.
Thats what we want you to believe.
Why?
If everybody time traveled it would get too crowded. Like when you went to see your
Grandma Abshire last Christmas and you had to go through OHare Airport and it was very,
very crowded? We time travelers dont want to mess things up for ourselves, so we keep it
quiet.
Clare chews on this for a minute. Come out.
Loan me your beach towel. She picks it up and all the pens and pencils and papers go
flying. She throws it at me, overhand, and I grab it and turn my back as I stand and wrap it
around my waist. It is bright pink and orange with a loud geometric pattern. Exactly the sort
of thing youd want to be wearing when you meet your future wife for the first time. I turn
around and walk into the clearing; I sit on the rock with as much dignity as possible. Clare
stands as far away from me as she can get and remain in the clearing. She is still clutching
her shoes.
Youre bleeding.
Well, yeah. You threw a shoe at me.
Oh.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
31
Silence. I am trying to look harmless, and nice. Nice looms large in Clares childhood,
because so many people arent.
Youre making fun of me.
I would never make fun of you. Why do you think Im making fun of you?
Clare is nothing if not stubborn. Nobody time travels. Youre lying.
Santa time travels.
What?
Sure. How do you think he gets all those presents delivered in one night? He just keeps
turning back the clock a few hours until he gets down every one of those chimneys.
Santa is magic. Youre not Santa.
Meaning Im not magic? Geez, Louise, youre a tough customer.
Im not Louise,
I know. Youre Clare. Clare Anne Abshire, born May 24, 1971. Your parents are Philip
and Lucille Abshire, and you live with them and your grandma and your brother, Mark, and
your sister, Alicia, in that big house up there.
Just because you know things doesnt mean youre from the future.
If you hang around a while you can watch me disappear I feel I can count on this
because Clare once told me it was the thing she found most impressive about our first
meeting.
Silence. Clare shifts her weight from foot to foot and waves away a mosquito. Do you
know Santa?
Personally? Um, no. I have stopped bleeding, but I must look awful. Hey, Clare, do
you happen to have a Band-Aid? Or some food? Time traveling makes me pretty hungry.
She thinks about this. She digs into her jumper pocket and produces a Hershey bar with
one bite out of it. She throws it at me.
Thank you. I love these. I eat it neatly but very quickly. My blood sugar is low. I put the
wrapper in her shopping bag. Clare is delighted.
You eat like a dog.
I do not! I am deeply offended. I have opposable thumbs, thank you very much.
What are posable thumbs?
Do this. I make the okay sign. Clare makes the okay sign. Opposable thumbs
means you can do that. It means you can open jars and tie your shoes and other things
animals cant do.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
32
Clare is not happy with this. Sister Carmelita says animals dont have souls.
Of course animals have souls. Where did she get that idea?
She said the Pope says.
The Popes an old meanie. Animals have much nicer souls than we do. They never tell
lies or blow anybody up.
They eat each other.
Well, they have to eat each other; they cant go to Dairy Queen and get a large vanilla
cone with sprinkles, can they? This is Clares favorite thing to eat in the whole wide world
(as a child. As an adult Clares favorite food is sushi, particularly sushi from Katsu on
Peterson Avenue).
They could eat grass.
So could we, but we dont. We eat hamburgers.
Clare sits down at the edge of the clearing. Etta says I shouldnt talk to strangers.
Thats good advice.
Silence.
When are you going to disappear?
When Im good and ready to. Are you bored with me? Clare rolls her eyes. What are
you working on?
Penmanship.
May I see?
Clare gets up carefully and collects a few pieces of stationery while fixing me with her
baleful stare. I lean forward slowly and extend my hand as though she is a Rottweiler, and
she quickly shoves the papers at me and retreats. I look at them intently, as though she has
just handed me a bunch of Bruce Rogers original drawings for Centaur or the Book of Kells
or something. She has printed, over and over, large and larger, Clare Anne Abshire. All the
ascenders and descenders have swirling curlicues and all the counters have smiley faces in
them. Its quite beautiful.
This is lovely.
Clare is pleased, as always when she receives homage for her work. I could make one for
you.
I would like that. But Im not allowed to take anything with me when I time travel, so
maybe you could keep it for me and I could just enjoy it while Im here.
Why cant you take anything?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
33
Well, think about it. If we time travelers started to move things around in time, pretty
soon the world would be a big mess. Lets say I brought some money with me into the past. I
could look up all the winning lottery numbers and football teams and make a ton of money.
That doesnt seem very fair, does it? Or if I was really dishonest, I could steal things and
bring them to the future where nobody could find me.
You could be a pirate! Clare seems so pleased with the idea of me as a pirate that she
forgets that I am Stranger Danger. You could bury the money and make a treasure map and
dig it up in the future. This is in fact more or less how Clare and I fund our rock-and-roll
lifestyle. As an adult Clare finds this mildly immoral, although it does give us an edge in the
stock market.
Thats a great idea. But what I really need isnt money, its clothing.
Clare looks at me doubtfully.
Does your dad have any clothes he doesnt need? Even a pair of pants would be great. I
mean, I like this towel, dont get me wrong, its just that where I come from, I usually like to
wear pants. Philip Abshire is a tad shorter than me and about thirty pounds heavier. His
pants are comical but comfortable on me.
I dont know....
Thats okay, you dont need to get them right now. But if you bring some next time I
come, it would be very nice.
Next time?
I find an unused piece of stationery and a pencil. I print in block letters: THURSDAY,
SEPTEMBER 29,1977 AFTER SUPPER. I hand Clare the paper, and she receives it cautiously.
My vision is blurring. I can hear Etta calling Clare. Its a secret, Clare, okay?
Why?
Cant tell. I have to go, now. It was nice to meet you. Dont take any wooden nickels. I
hold out my hand and Clare takes it, bravely. As we shake hands, I disappear.
Wednesday, February 9, 2000 (Clare is 28, Henry is 36)
CLARE: Its early, about six in the morning and Im sleeping the thin dreamy sleep of six in
the morning when Henry slams me awake and I realize hes been elsewhen. He materializes
practically on top of me and I yell, and we scare the shit out of each other and then he starts
laughing and rolls over and I roll over and look at him and realize that his mouth is bleeding
profusely. I jump up to get a washcloth and Henry is still smiling when I get back and start
daubing at his lip.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
34
Howd that happen?
You threw a shoe at me. I dont remember ever throwing anything at Henry.
Did not.
Did too. We just met for the very first time, and as soon as you laid eyes on me you said,
Thats the man Im going to marry, and you pasted me one. I always said you were an
excellent judge of character.
Thursday, September 29, 1977 (Clare is 6, Henry is 35)
CLARE: The calendar on Daddys desk this morning said the same as the paper the man
wrote. Nell was making a soft egg for Alicia and Etta was yelling at Mark cause he didnt do
his homework and played Frisbee with Steve. I said Etta can I have some clothes from the
trunks? meaning the trunks in the attic where we play dress up, and Etta said What for? and I
said I want to play dress up with Megan and Etta got mad and said It was time to go to school
and I could worry about playing when I got home. So I went to school and we did adding and
mealworms and language arts and after lunch French and music and religion. I worried all
day about pants for the man cause he seemed like he really wanted pants. So when I got
home I went to ask Etta again but she was in town but Nell let me lick both the beaters of
cake batter which Etta wont let us because you get salmon. And Mama was writing and I
was gonna go away without asking but she said What is it, Baby? so I asked and she said I
could go look in the Goodwill bags and have anything I wanted. So I went to the laundry
room and looked in the Goodwill bags and found three pairs of Daddys pants but one had a
big cigarette hole. So I took two and I found a white shirt like Daddy wears to work and a tie
with fishes on it and a red sweater. And the yellow bathrobe that Daddy had when I was little
and it smelled like Daddy. I put the clothes in a bag and put the bag in the mud-room closet.
When I was coming out of the mud room Mark saw me and he said What are you doing,
asshole? And I said Nothing, asshole and he pulled my hair and I stepped on his foot really
hard and then he started to cry and went to tell. So I went up to my room and played
Television with Mr. Bear and Jane where Jane is the movie star and Mr. Bear asks her about
how it is being a movie star and she says she really wants to be a veterinarian but she is so
incredibly pretty she has to be a movie star and Mr. Bear says maybe she could be a
veterinarian when shes old. And Etta knocked and said Why are you stepping on Mark? and
I said Because Mark pulled my hair for no reason and Etta said You two are getting on my
nerves and went away so that was okay. We ate dinner with just Etta because Daddy and
Mama went to a party. It was fried chicken with little peas and chocolate cake and Mark got
the biggest piece but I didnt say anything because I licked the beaters. So after dinner I
asked Etta if I could go outside and she said did I have homework and I said Spelling and
bring leaves for art class, and she said Okay as long as you come in by dark. So I went and
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
35
got my blue sweater with the zebras and I got the bag and I went out and went to the
clearing. But the man wasnt there and I sat on the rock for a while and then I thought I better
get some leaves. So I went back to the garden and found some leaves from Mamas little tree
that she told me later was Ginkgo, and some leaves from the Maple and the Oak. So then I
went back to the clearing he still wasnt there and I thought Well, I guess he just made up
that he was coming and he didnt want pants so bad after all. And I thought maybe Ruth was
right cause I told her about the man and she said I was making it up because people dont
disappear in real life only on TV. Or maybe it was a dream like when Buster died and I
dreamed he was okay and he was in his cage but I woke up and no Buster and Mama said
Dreams are different than real life but important too. And it was getting cold and I thought
maybe I should just leave the bag and if the man came he could have his pants. So I was
walking back up the path and there was this noise and somebody said Ouch. Dang, that hurt.
And then I was scared.
HENRY: I kind of slam into the rock when I appear and scrape my knees. I am in the clearing
and the sun is setting beautifully in a spectacular J. M. W. Turner blowout orange and red
over the trees. The clearing is empty except for a shopping bag full of clothes and I rapidly
deduce that Clare has left these and this is probably a day shortly after our first meeting.
Clare is nowhere in sight and I call her name softly. No response. I dig through the bag of
clothes. Theres the pair of chinos and the beautiful pair of brown wool trousers, a hideous
tie with trout all over it, the Harvard sweater, the oxford-cloth white shirt with ring around
the collar and sweat stains under the arms, and the exquisite silk bathrobe with Philips
monogram and a big tear over the pocket. All these clothes are old friends, except for the tie,
and Im happy to see them. I don the chinos and the sweater and bless Clares apparently
hereditary good taste and sense. I feel great; except for the lack of shoes Im well equipped
for my current location in spacetime. Thanks, Clare, you did a great job  I call softly.
I am surprised when she appears at the entrance to the clearing. Its getting dark quickly
and Clare looks tiny and scared in the half light.
Hi.
Hi, Clare. Thanks for the clothes. Theyre perfect, and theyll keep me nice and warm
tonight.
I have to go in soon.
Thats okay, its almost dark. Is it a school night?
Uh-huh.
Whats the date?
Thursday, September 29,1977.
Thats very helpful. Thanks.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
36
How come you dont know that?
Well, I just got here. A few minutes ago it was Monday, March 27, 2000. It was a rainy
morning and I was making toast.
But you wrote it down for me. She takes out a piece of Philips law office letterhead
and holds it out for me. I walk to her and take it, and am interested to see the date written on
it in my careful block lettering. I pause and grope for the best way to explain the vagaries of
time travel to the small child who is Clare at the moment.
Its like this. You know how to use a tape recorder?
Mmhmm.
Okay. So you put in a tape and you play it from the beginning to the end, right?
Yeah....
Thats how your life is. You get up in the morning and you eat breakfast and you brush
your teeth and you go to school, right? You dont get up and suddenly find yourself at school
eating lunch with Helen and Ruth and then all of a sudden youre at home getting dressed,
right?
Clare giggles. Right.
Now for me, its different. Because I am a time traveler, I jump around a lot from one
time to another. So its like if you started the tape and played it for a while but then you said
Oh I want to hear that song again, so you played that song and then you went back to where
you left off but you wound the tape too far ahead so you rewound it again but you still got it
too far ahead. You see?
Sort of.
Well, its not the greatest analogy in the world. Basically, sometimes I get lost in time
and I dont know when I am.
 Whats analogy?
Its when you try to explain something by saying its like another thing. For example, at
the moment I am as snug as a bug in a rug in this nice sweater, and you are as pretty as a
picture, and Etta is going to be as mad as a hatter if you dont go in pretty soon.
Are you going to sleep here? You could come to our house, we have a guest room.
Gosh, thats very nice of you. Unfortunately, I am not allowed to meet your family until
1991.
Clare is utterly perplexed. I think part of the problem is that she cant imagine dates
beyond the 70s. I remember having the same problem with the 60s when I was her age.
Why not?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
37
Its part of the rules. People who time travel arent supposed to go around talking to
regular people while they visit their times, because we might mess things up. Actually, I
dont believe this; things happen the way they happened, once and only once. Im not a
proponent of splitting universes.
But you talk to me.
Youre special. Youre brave and smart and good at keeping secrets.
Clare is embarrassed. I told Ruth, but she didnt believe me.
Oh. Well, dont worry about it. Very few people ever believe me, either. Especially
doctors. Doctors dont believe anything unless you can prove it to them.
I believe you.
Clare is standing about five feet away from me. Her small pale face catches the last
orange light from the west. Her hair is pulled back tightly into a ponytail and she is wearing
blue jeans and a dark sweater with zebras running across the chest. Her hands are clenched
and she looks fierce and determined. Our daughter, I think sadly, would have looked like
this.
Thank you, Clare.
I have to go in now.
Good idea.
Are you coming back?
I consult the List, from memory. Ill be back October 16. Its a Friday. Come here, right
after school. Bring that little blue diary Megan gave you for your birthday and a blue
ballpoint pen I repeat the date, looking at Clare to make sure she is remembering.
Au revoir, Clare.
Aurevoir....
Henry.
 Au revoir, Henri. Already her accent is better than mine. Clare turns and runs up the
path, into the arms of her lighted and welcoming house, and I turn to the dark and begin to
walk across the meadow. Later in the evening I chuck the tie in the dumpster behind Dinas
Fish n Fry.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
38
LESSONS IN SURVIVAL
Thursday, June 7, 1973 (Henry is 27, and 9)
HENRY: I am standing across the street from the Art Institute of Chicago on a sunny June day
in 1973 in the company of my nine-year-old self. He is traveling from next Wednesday; I
have come from 1990. We have a long afternoon and evening to frivol as we will, and so we
have come to one of the great art museums of the world for a little lesson in pick-pocketing.
Cant we just look at the art? pleads Henry. Hes nervous. Hes never done this before.
Nope. You need to know this. How are you going to survive if you cant steal anything?
Begging.
Begging is a drag, and you keep getting carted off by the police. Now, listen: when we
get in there, I want you to stay away from me and pretend we dont know each other. But be
close enough to watch what Im doing. If I hand you anything, dont drop it, and put it in
your pocket as fast as you can. Okay?
I guess. Can we go see St. George?
Sure. We cross Michigan Avenue and walk between students and housewives sunning
themselves on the museum steps. Henry pats one of the bronze lions as we go by.
I feel moderately bad about this whole thing. On the one hand, I am providing myself
with urgently required survival skills. Other lessons in this series include Shoplifting,
Beating People Up, Picking Locks, Climbing Trees, Driving, Housebreaking, Dumpster
Diving, and How to Use Oddball Things like Venetian Blinds and Garbage Can Lids as
Weapons. On the other hand, Im corrupting my poor innocent little self. I sigh. Somebodys
got to do it.
Its Free Day, so the place is swarming with people. We stand in line, move through the
entry, and slowly climb the grandiose central staircase. We enter the European Galleries and
make our way backward from the seventeenth-century Netherlands to fifteenth-century
Spain. St. George stands poised, as always, ready to transfix his dragon with his delicate
spear while the pink and green princess waits demurely in the middleground. My self and I
love the yellow-bellied dragon wholeheartedly, and we are always relieved to find that his
moment of doom has still not arrived.
Henry and I stand before Bernardo Martorells painting for five minutes, and then he turns
to me. We have the gallery to ourselves at the moment.
Its not so hard, I say. Pay attention. Look for someone who is distracted. Figure out
where the wallet is. Most men use either their back pocket or the inside pocket of their suit
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
39
jacket. With women you want the purse behind their back. If youre on the street you can just
grab the whole purse, but then you have to be sure you can outrun anybody who might
decide to chase you. Its much quieter if you can take it without them noticing.
I saw a movie where they practiced with a suit of clothes with little bells and if the guy
moved the suit while he took the wallet the bells rang.
Yeah, I remember that movie. You can try that at home. Now follow me. I lead Henry
from the fifteenth century to the nineteenth; we arrive suddenly in the midst of French
Impressionism. The Art Institute is famous for its Impressionist collection. I can take it or
leave it, but as usual these rooms are jam-packed with people craning for a glimpse of La
Grande Jatte or a Monet Haystack. Henry cant see over the heads of the adults, so the
paintings are lost on him, but hes too nervous to look at them anyway. I scan the room. A
woman is bending over her toddler as it twists and screams. Must be nap time. I nod at Henry
and move toward her. Her purse has a simple clasp and is slung over her shoulder, across her
back. Shes totally focused on getting her child to stop screeching. Shes in front of
Toulouse-Lautrecs At the Moulin Rouge. I pretend to be looking at it as I walk, bump into
her, sending her pitching forward, I catch her arm, Im so sorry, forgive me, I wasnt
looking, are you all right? Its so crowded in here.... My hand is in her purse, shes
flustered, she has dark eyes and long hair, large breasts, shes still trying to lose the weight
she gained having the kid. I catch her eye as I find her wallet, still apologizing, the wallet
goes up my jacket sleeve, I look her up and down and smile, back away, turn, walk, look
over my shoulder. She has picked up her boy and is staring back at me, slightly forlorn. I
smile and walk, walk. Henry is following me as I take the stairs down to the Junior Museum.
We rendezvous by the mens toilets.
That was weird, says Henry. Whyd she look at you like that?
Shes lonely, I euphemize. Maybe her husband isnt around very much. We cram
ourselves into a stall and I open her wallet. Her name is Denise Radke. She lives in Villa
Park, Illinois. She is a member of the museum and an alumna of Roosevelt University. She is
carrying twenty-two dollars in cash, plus change. I show all this to Henry, silently, put the
wallet back as it was, and hand it to him. We walk out of the stall, out of the mens room,
back toward the entrance to the museum. Give this to the guard. Say you found it on the
floor.
Why?
We dont need it; I was just demonstrating. Henry runs to the guard, an elderly black
woman who smiles and gives Henry a sort of half-hug. He conies back slowly, and we walk
ten feet apart, with me leading, down the long dark corridor which will someday house
Decorative Arts and lead to the as-yet-unthought-of Rice Wing, but which at the moment is
full of posters. Im looking for easy marks, and just ahead of me is a perfect illustration of
the pickpockets dream. Short, portly, sun burnt, he looks as though hes made a wrong turn
from Wrigley Field in his baseball cap and polyester trousers with light blue short-sleeved
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
40
button-down shirt. Hes lecturing his mousy girlfriend on Vincent van Gogh.
So he cuts his ear off and gives it to his girlhey, howd you like that for a present,
huh? An ear! Huh. So they put him in the loony bin...
I have no qualms about this one. He strolls on, braying, blissfully unaware, with his wallet
in his left back pocket. He has a large gut but almost no backside, and his wallet is pretty
much aching for me to take it. I amble along behind them. Henry has a clear view as I deftly
insert my thumb and forefinger into the marks pocket and liberate the wallet. I drop back,
they walk on, I pass the wallet to Henry and he shoves it into his pants as I walk ahead.
I show Henry some other techniques: how to take a wallet from the inside breast pocket of
a suit, how to shield your hand from view while its inside a womans purse, six different
ways to distract someone while you take their wallet, how to take a wallet out of a backpack,
and how to get someone to inadvertently show you where their money is. Hes more relaxed
now, hes even starting to enjoy this. Finally, I say, Okay, now you try.
Hes instantly petrified. I cant.
Sure you can. Look around. Find someone. We are standing in the Japanese Print
Room. Its full of old ladies.
Not here.
Okay, where?
He thinks for a minute. The restaurant?
We walk quietly to the restaurant. I remember this all vividly. I was totally terrified. I
look over at my self and sure enough, his face is white with fear. Im smiling, because I
know what comes next. We stand at the end of the line for the garden restaurant. Henry looks
around, thinking.
In front of us in line is a very tall middle-aged man wearing a beautifully cut brown
lightweight suit; its impossible to see where the wallet is. Henry approaches him, with one
of the wallets Ive lifted earlier proffered on his outstretched hand.
Sir? Is this yours? says Henry softly. It was on the floor.
Uh? Oh, hmm, no, the man checks his right back pants pocket, finds his wallet safe,
leans over Henry to hear him better, takes the wallet from Henry and opens it. Hmm, my,
you should take this to the security guards, hmm, theres quite a bit of cash in here, yes, the
man wears thick glasses and peers at Henry through them as he speaks and Henry reaches
around under the mans jacket and steals his wallet. Since Henry is wearing a short-sleeved
T-shirt I walk behind him and he passes the wallet to me. The tall thin brown-suited man
points at the stairs, explaining to Henry how to turn in the wallet. Henry toddles off in the
direction the man has indicated, and I follow, overtake Henry and lead him right through the
museum to the entrance and out, past the guards, onto Michigan Avenue and south, until we
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
41
end up, grinning like fiends, at the Artists Cafe, where we treat ourselves to milkshakes and
french fries with some of our ill-gotten gains. Afterwards we throw all the wallets in a
mailbox, sans cash, and I get us a room at the Palmer House.
So? I ask, sitting on the side of the bathtub watching Henry brush his teeth.
 ot? returns Henry with a mouth full of toothpaste.
What do you think?
He spits. About what?
Pick-pocketing.
He looks at me in the mirror. Its okay. He turns and looks directly at me. I did it! He
grins, largely.
You were brilliant!
Yeah! The grin fades. Henry, I dont like to time travel by myself. Its better with you.
Cant you always come with me?
He is standing with his back to me, and we look at each other in the mirror. Poor small
self: at this age my back is thin and my shoulder blades stick out like incipient wings. He
turns, waiting for an answer, and I know what I have to tell himme. I reach out and gently
turn him and bring him to stand by me, so we are side by side, heads level, facing the mirror.
Look. We study our reflections, twinned in the ornate gilt Palmer House bathroom
splendor. Our hair is the same brown-black, our eyes slant dark and fatigue-ringed
identically, we sport exact replicas of each others ears. Im taller and more muscular and
shave. Hes slender and ungainly and is all knees and elbows. I reach up and pull my hair
back from my face, show him the scar from the accident. Unconsciously, he mimics my
gesture, touches the same scar on his own forehead.
Its just like mine, says my self, amazed. How did you get it?
The same as you. It is the same. We are the same.
A translucent moment. I didnt understand, and then I did, just like that. I watch it happen.
I want to be both of us at once, feel again the feeling of losing the edges of my self, of seeing
the admixture of future and present for the first time. But Im too accustomed, too
comfortable with it, and so I am left on the outside, remembering the wonder of being nine
and suddenly seeing, knowing, that my friend, guide, brother was me. Me, only me. The
loneliness of it.
Youre me.
When you are older.
But...what about the others?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
42
Other time travelers?
He nods.
I dont think there are any. I mean, Ive never met any others.
A tear gathers at the edge of his left eye. When I was little, I imagined a whole society of
time travelers, of which Henry, my teacher, was an emissary, sent to train me for eventual
inclusion in this vast camaraderie. I still feel like a castaway, the last member of a once
numerous species. It was as though Robinson Crusoe discovered the telltale footprint on the
beach and then realized that it was his own. My self, small as a leaf, thin as water, begins to
cry. I hold him, hold me, for a long time.
Later, we order hot chocolate from room service, and watch Johnny Carson. Henry falls
asleep with the light on. As the show ends I look over at him and hes gone, vanished back to
my old room in my dads apartment, standing sleep-addled beside my old bed, falling into it,
gratefully. I turn off the TV and the bedside lamp. 1973 street noises drift in the open
window. I want to go home. I lie on the hard hotel bed, desolate, alone. I still dont
understand.
Sunday, December 10, 1978 (Henry is 15, and 15)
HENRY: Im in my bedroom with my self. Hes here from next March. We are doing what we
often do when we have a little privacy, when its cold out, when both of us are past puberty
and havent quite gotten around to actual girls yet. I think most people would do this, if they
had the sort of opportunities I have. I mean, Im not gay or anything.
Its late Sunday morning. I can hear the bells ringing at St. Joes. Dad came home late last
night; I think he must have stopped at the Exchequer after the concert; he was so drunk he
fell down on the stairs and I had to haul him into the apartment and put him to bed. He
coughs and I hear him messing around in the kitchen.
My other self seems distracted; he keeps looking at the door. What? I ask him.
Nothing, he says. I get up and check the lock.  No, he says. He seems to be making a
huge effort to speak. Come on, I say.
I hear Dads heavy step right outside my door. Henry? he says, and the knob of the door
slowly turns and I abruptly realize that I have inadvertently unlocked the door and Henry
leaps for it but its too late: Dad sticks his head in and there we are, in flagrante delicto.
Oh, he says. His eyes are wide and he looks completely disgusted. Jesus, Henry. He
shuts the door and I hear him walking back to his room. I throw my self a reproachful glare
as I pull on a pair of jeans and a T-shirt. I walk down the hall to Dads bedroom. His door is
shut. I knock. No answer. I wait. Dad? Silence. I open the door, stand in the doorway.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
43
Dad? Hes sitting with his back to me, on his bed. He continues to sit, and I stand there for
a while, but I cant bring myself to walk into the room. Finally I shut the door, walk back to
my own room.
That was completely and totally your fault, I tell my self severely. He is wearing jeans,
sitting on the chair with his head in his hands. You knew, you knew that was going to
happen and you didnt say a word. Where is your sense of self preservation? What the hell is
wrong with you? What use is it knowing the future if you cant at least protect us from
humiliating little scenes
Shut up  Henry croaks. Just shut up.
I will not shut up, I say, my voice rising. I mean, all you had to do was say
Listen. He looks up at me with resignation. It was like.. .it was like that day at the iceskating
rink.
Oh. Shit. A couple years ago, I saw a little girl get hit in the head with a hockey puck at
Indian Head Park. It was horrible. I found out later that she died in the hospital. And then I
started to time travel back to that day, over and over, and I wanted to warn her mother, and I
couldnt. It was like being in the audience at a movie. It was like being a ghost. I would
scream, No, take her home, dont let her near the ice, take her away, shes going to get hurt,
shes going to die, and I would realize that the words were only in my head, and everything
would go on as before.
Henry says, You talk about changing the future, but for me this is the past, and as far as I
can tell theres nothing I can do about it. I mean, I tried, and it was the trying that made it
happen. If I hadnt said something, you wouldnt have gotten up....
Then why did you say anything?
Because I did. You will, just wait. He shrugs. Its like with Mom. The accident. Immer
wieder. Always again, always the same.
Free will?
He gets up, walks to the window, stands looking out over the Tatingers backyard. I was
just talking about that with a self from 1992. He said something interesting: he said that he
thinks there is only free will when you are in time, in the present. He says in the past we can
only do what we did, and we can only be there if we were there.
But whenever I am, thats my present. Shouldnt I be able to decide
No. Apparently not.
What did he say about the future?
Well, think. You go to the future, you do something, you come back to the present. Then
the thing that you did is part of your past. So thats probably inevitable, too.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
44
I feel a weird combination of freedom and despair. Im sweating; he opens the window
and cold air floods into the room. But then Im not responsible for anything I do while Im
not in the present.
He smiles. Thank God.
And everything has already happened.
Sure looks that way. He runs his hand over his face, and I see that he could use a shave.
But he said that you have to behave as though you have free will, as though you are
responsible for what you do.
Why? What does it matter?
Apparently, if you dont, things are bad. Depressing.
Did he know that personally?
Yes.
So what happens next?
Dad ignores you for three weeks. And thishe waves his hand at the bedweve got
to stop meeting like this.
I sigh. Right, no problem. Anything else?
Vivian Teska.
Vivian is this girl in Geometry whom I lust after. Ive never said a word to her.
After class tomorrow, go up to her and ask her out.
I dont even know her.
Trust me. Hes smirking at me in a way that makes me wonder why on earth I would
ever trust him but I want to believe. Okay.
I should get going. Money, please. I dole out twenty dollars. More. I hand him
another twenty.
Thats all Ive got.
Okay. Hes dressing, pulling clothes from the stash of things I dont mind never seeing
again. How about a coat? I hand him a Peruvian skiing sweater that Ive always hated. He
makes a face and puts it on. We walk to the back door of the apartment. The church bells are
tolling noon. Bye, says my self.
Good luck, I say, oddly moved by the sight of me embarking into the unknown, into a
cold Chicago Sunday morning he doesnt belong in. He thumps down the wooden stairs, and
I turn to the silent apartment.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
45
Wednesday, November 17/Tuesday, September 28, 1982 (Henry is 19)
HENRY: Im in the back of a police car in Zion, Illinois. I am wearing handcuffs and not
much else. The interior of this particular police car smells like cigarettes, leather, sweat, and
another odor I cant identify that seems endemic to police cars. The odor of freak-outedness,
perhaps. My left eye is swelling shut and the front of my body is covered with bruises and
cuts and dirt from being tackled by the larger of the two policemen in an empty lot full of
broken glass. The policemen are standing outside the car talking to the neighbors, at least one
of whom evidently saw me trying to break into the yellow and white Victorian house we are
parked in front of. I dont know where I am in time. Ive been here for about an hour, and I
have fucked up completely. Im very hungry. Im very tired. Im supposed to be in Dr.
Quarries Shakespeare seminar, but Im sure Ive managed to miss it. Too bad. Were doing
Midsummer Nights Dream.
The upside of this police car is: its warm and Im not in Chicago. Chicagos Finest hate
me because I keep disappearing while Im in custody, and they cant figure it out. Also I
refuse to talk to them, so they still dont know who I am, or where I live. The day they find
out, Im toast because there are several outstanding warrants for my arrest: breaking and
entering, shoplifting, resisting arrest, breaking arrest, trespassing, indecent exposure,
robbery, und so weiter. From this one might deduce that I am a very inept criminal, but really
the main problem is that its so hard to be inconspicuous when youre naked. Stealth and
speed are my main assets and so, when I try to burgle houses in broad daylight stark naked,
sometimes it doesnt work out. Ive been arrested seven times, and so far Ive always
vanished before they can fingerprint me or take a photo.
The neighbors keep peering in the windows of the police car at me. I dont care. I dont
care. This is taking a long time. Fuck, I hate this. I lean back and close my eyes.
A car door opens. Cold airmy eyes fly openfor an instant I see the metal grid that
separates the front of the car from the back, the cracked vinyl seats, my hands in the cuffs,
my gooseflesh legs, the flat sky through the windshield, the black visored hat on the
dashboard, the clipboard in the officers hand, his red face, tufted graying eyebrows and
jowls like drapeseverything shimmers, iridescent, butter fly-wing colors and the policeman
says, Hey, hes having some kinda fit and my teeth are chattering hard and before my
eyes the police car vanishes and I am lying on my back in my own backyard. Yes. Yes! I fill
my lungs with the sweet September night air. I sit up and rub my wrists, still marked where
the handcuffs were.
I laugh and laugh. I have escaped again! Houdini, Prospero, behold me! for I am a
magician, too.
Nausea overcomes me, and I heave bile onto Kimys mums.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
46
Saturday, May 14, 1983 (Clare is 11 almost 12)
CLARE: Its Mary Christina Heppworths birthday and all the fifth-grade girls from St.
Basils are sleeping over at her house. We have pizza and Cokes and fruit salad for dinner,
and Mrs. Heppworth made a big cake shaped like a unicorns head with Happy Birthday
Mary Christina! in red icing and we sing and Mary Christina blows out all twelve candles in
one blow. I think I know what she wished for; I think she wished not to get any taller. Thats
what I would wish if I were her, anyway. Mary Christina is the tallest person in our class.
Shes 59. Her mom is a little shorter than her, but her dad is really, really tall. Helen asked
Mary Christina once and she said hes 67. Shes the only girl in her family. and her brothers
are all older and shave and theyre really tall, too. They make a point of ignoring us and
eating a lot of cake and Patty and Ruth especially giggle a lot whenever they come where we
are. Its so embarrassing. Mary Christina opens her presents. I got her a green sweater just
like my blue one that she liked with the crocheted collar from Laura Ashley. After dinner we
watch The Parent Trap on video and the Heppworth family kind of hangs around watching
us until we all take turns putting on our pajamas in the second floor bathroom and we crowd
into Mary Christinas room that is decorated totally in pink, even the wall-to-wall carpet.
You get the feeling Mary Christinas parents were really glad to finally have a girl after all
those brothers. We have all brought our sleeping bags, but we pile them against one wall and
sit on Mary Christinas bed and on the floor. Nancy has a bottle of Peppermint Schnapps and
we all drink some. It tastes awful, and it feels like Vicks VapoRub in my chest. We play
Truth or Dare. Ruth dares Wendy to run down the hall without her top on. Wendy asks
Francie what size bra Lexi, Francies seventeen-year-old sister, wears. (Answer: 38D.)
Francie asks Gayle what she was doing with Michael Planner at the Dairy Queen last
Saturday. (Answer: eating ice cream. Well, duh.) After a while we all get bored with Truth or
Dare, mainly because its hard to think of good dares that any of us will actually do, and
because we all pretty much know whatever there is to know about each other, because weve
been going to school together since kindergarten. Mary Christina says, Lets do Ouija
board, and we all agree, because its her party and cause Ouija board is cool. She gets it out
of her closet. The box is all mashed, and the little plastic thing that shows the letters is
missing its plastic window. Henry told me once that he went to a sance and the medium had
her appendix burst in the middle of it and they had to call an ambulance. The board is only
really big enough for two people to do it at once, so Mary Christina and Helen go first. The
rule is you have to ask what you want to know out loud or it wont work. They each put their
fingers on the plastic thing. Helen looks at Mary Christina, who hesitates and Nancy says,
Ask about Bobby, so Mary Christina asks, Does Bobby Duxler like me? Everybody
giggles.
The answer is no, but the Ouija says yes, with a little pushing by Helen. Mary Christina
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
47
smiles so hugely I can see her braces, top and bottom. Helen asks if any boys like her. The
Ouija circles around for a while, and then stops on D, A, V. David Hanley? says Patty, and
everybody laughs. Dave is the only black kid in our class. Hes real shy and small and hes
good at math. Maybe hell help you with long division says Laura, who is also very shy.
Helen laughs. Shes terrible at math. Here, Clare. You and Ruth try. We take Helen and
Mary Christinas places. Ruth looks at me and I shrug. I dont know what to ask, I say.
Everybody snickers; how many possible questions are there? But there are so many things I
want to know. Is Mama going to be okay? Why was Daddy yelling at Etta this morning? Is
Henry a real person? Where did Mark hide my French homework? Ruth says, What boys
like Clare? I give her a mean look, but she just smiles. Dont you want to know?
No, I say, but I put my fingers on the white plastic anyway. Ruth puts her fingers on too
and nothing moves. We are both touching the thing very lightly, we are trying to do it right
and not push. Then it starts to move, slow. It goes in circles, and then stops on H. Then it
speeds up. E, N, R, Y. Henry, says Mary Christina, whos Henry? Helen says, I dont
know, but youre blushing, Clare. Who is Henry? I just shake my head, like its a mystery to
me, too. You ask, Ruth. She asks (big surprise) who likes her; the Ouija spells out R, I, C,
K. I can feel her pushing. Rick is Mr. Malone, our Science teacher, who has a crush on Miss
Engle, the English teacher. Everybody except Patty laughs; Patty has a crush on Mr. Malone,
too. Ruth and I get up and Laura and Nancy sit down. Nancy has her back to me, so I cant
see her face when she asks, Who is Henry? Everybody looks at me and gets real quiet. I
watch the board. Nothing. Just as Im thinking Im safe, the plastic thing starts to move. H, it
says. I think maybe it will just spell Henry again; after all, Nancy and Laura dont know
anything about Henry. I dont even know that much about Henry. Then it goes on: U, S, B,
A, N, D. They all look at me. Well, Im not married; Im only eleven.
But whos Henry? wonders Laura. I dont know. Maybe hes somebody I havent met
yet. She nods. Everyone is weirded out. Im very weirded out. Husband? Husband?
Thursday, April 12, 1984 (Henry is 36, Clare is 12)
HENRY: Clare and I are playing chess in the fire circle in the woods. Its a beautiful spring
day, and the woods are alive with birds courting and birds nesting. We are keeping ourselves
out of the way of Clares family, who are out and about this afternoon. Clare has been stuck
on her move for a while; I took her Queen Three moves ago and now she is doomed but
determined to go down fighting.
She looks up, Henry, whos your favorite Beatle?
John. Of course.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
48
Why of course?
Well, Ringo is okay but kind of a sad sack, you know? And George is a little too New
Age for my taste.
Whats New Age?
Oddball religions. Sappy boring music. Pathetic attempts to convince oneself of the
superiority of anything connected with Indians. Non-Western medicine.
But you dont like regular medicine 
Thats because doctors are always trying to tell me Im crazy. If I had a broken arm I
would be a big fan of Western medicine.
What about Paul?
Paul is for girls.
Clare smiles, shyly. I like Paul best.
Well, youre a girl.
Why is Paul for girls?
Tread carefully, I tell myself. Uh, gee. Paul is, like, the Nice Beatle, you know?
Is that bad?
No, not at all. But guys are more interested in being cool, and John is the Cool Beatle.
Oh. But hes dead.
I laugh. You can still be cool when youre dead. In fact, its much easier, because you
arent getting old and fat and losing your hair.
Clare hums the beginning of When Im 64. She moves her rook forward five spaces. I
can checkmate her now, and I point this out to her and she hastily takes back the move.
So why do you like Paul? I ask her. I look up in time to see her blushing fervently.
Hes so... beautiful, Clare says. Theres something about the way she says it that makes
me feel strange. I study the board, and it occurs to me that Clare could checkmate me if she
took my bishop with her knight. I wonder if I should tell her this. If she was a little younger,
I would. Twelve is old enough to fend for yourself. Clare is staring dreamily at the board. It
dawns on me that I am jealous. Jesus. I cant believe Im feeling jealous of a multimillionaire
rock star geezer old enough to be Clares dad.
Hmpf, I say.
Clare looks up, smiling mischievously. Who do you like?
You, I think but dont say. You mean when I was your age?
Um, yeah. When were you my age?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
49
I weigh the value and potential of this nugget before I dole it out. I was your age in 1975.
Im eight years older than you.
So youre twenty?
Well, no, Im thirty-six. Old enough to be your dad.
Clare furrows her brow. Math is not her strongest subject. But if you were twelve in
1975....
Oh, sorry. Youre right. I mean, I myself am thirty-six, but somewhere out thereI
wave my hand toward the southIm twenty. In real time.
Clare strives to digest this. So there are two of you?
Not exactly. Theres always only one me, but when Im time traveling sometimes I go
somewhere I already am, and yeah, then you could say there are two. Or more.
How come I never see more than one?
You will. When you and I meet in my present that will happen fairly frequently. More
often than Id like, Clare.
So who did you like in 1975?
Nobody, really. At twelve I had other stuff to think about. But when I was thirteen I had
this huge crush on Patty Hearst.
Clare looks annoyed. A girl you knew at school?
I laugh. No. She was a rich Californian college girl who got kidnapped by these awful
left-wing political terrorists, and they made her rob banks. She was on the news every night
for months.
What happened to her? Why did you like her?
They eventually let her go, and she got married and had kids and now shes a rich lady in
California. Why did I like her? Ah, I dont know. Its irrational, you know? I guess I kind of
knew how she felt, being taken away and forced to do stuff she didnt want to do, and then it
seemed like she was kind of enjoying it.
Do you do things you dont want to do?
Yeah. All the time. My leg has fallen asleep and I stand up and shake it until it tingles.
I dont always end up safe and sound with you, Clare. A lot of times I go places where I
have to get clothes and food by stealing.
Oh. Her face clouds, and then she sees her move, and makes it, and looks up at me
triumphantly. Checkmate!
Hey! Bravo! I salaam her. You are the chess queen dujour.
Yes, I am, Clare says, pink with pride. She starts to set the pieces back in their starting
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
50
positions. Again?
I pretend to consult my nonexistent watch. Sure. I sit down again. You hungry?
Weve been out here for hours and supplies have run low; all we have left is the dregs of a
bag of Doritos.
Mmhmm. Clare holds the pawns behind her back; I tap her right elbow and she shows
me the white pawn. I make my standard opening move, Queens Pawn to Q4. She makes her
standard response to my standard opening move, Queens Pawn to Q4. We play out the next
ten moves fairly rapidly, with only moderate bloodshed, and then Clare sits for a while,
pondering the board. She is always experimenting, always attempting the coup declat. Who
do you like now? she asks without looking up.
You mean at twenty? Or at thirty-six?
Both.
I try to remember being twenty. Its just a blur of women, breasts, legs, skin, hair. All
their stories have jumbled together, and their faces no longer attach themselves to names. I
was busy but miserable at twenty. Twenty was nothing special. Nobody springs to mind.
And thirty-six?
I scrutinize Clare. Is twelve too young? Im sure twelve is really too young. Better to
fantasize about beautiful, unattainable, safe Paul McCartney than to have to contend with
Henry the Time Traveling Geezer. Why is she asking this anyway?
Henry?
Yeah?
Are you married?
Yes, I admit reluctantly.
To who?
A very beautiful, patient, talented, smart woman.
Her faces falls. Oh. She picks up one of my white bishops, which she captured two
moves ago, and spins it on the ground like a top. Well, thats nice. She seems kind of put
out by this news.
Whats wrong?
Nothing. Clare moves her queen from Q2 to KN5. Check.
I move my knight to protect my king.
Am I married? Clare inquires.
I meet her eyes. Youre pushing your luck today.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
51
Why not? You never tell me anything anyway. Come on, Henry, tell me if Im gonna be
an old maid.
Youre a nun, I tease her.
Clare shudders. Boy, I hope not. She takes one of my pawns with her rook. How did
you meet your wife?
Sorry. Top secret information. I take her rook with my queen.
Clare makes a face. Ouch. Were you time traveling? When you met her?
 I was minding my own business.
Clare sighs. She takes another pawn with her other rook. Im starting to run low on
pawns. I move Queens Bishop to KB4.
Its not fair that you know everything about me but you never tell me anything about
you.
True. Its not fair. I try to look regretful, and obliging.
I mean, Ruth and Helen and Megan and Laura tell me everything and I tell them
everything.
Everything?
Yeah. Well, I dont tell them about you.
Oh? Whys that?
Clare looks a bit defensive. Youre a secret. They wouldnt believe me, anyway. She
traps my bishop with her knight, flashes me a sly smile. I contemplate the board, trying to
find a way to take her knight or move my bishop. Things are looking grim for White.
Henry, are you really a person?
I am a bit taken aback. Yes. What else would I be?
I dont know. A spirit?
Im really a person, Clare.
Prove it.
How?
I dont know.
I mean, I dont think you could prove that youre a person, Clare.
Sure I can.
How?
Im just like a person.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
52
Well, Im just like a person, too. Its funny that Clare is bringing this up; back in 1999
Dr. Kendrick and I are engaged in philosophical trench warfare over this very issue.
Kendrick is convinced that I am a harbinger of a new species of human, as different from
everyday folks as Cro-Magnon Man was from his Neanderthal neighbors. I contend that Im
just a piece of messed-up code, and our inability to have kids proves that Im not going to be
the Missing Link. Weve taken to quoting Kierkegaard and Heidegger at each other and
glowering. Meanwhile, Clare regards me doubtfully.
 People dont appear and disappear the way you do. Youre like the Cheshire Cat.
Are you implying that Im a fictional character? I spot my move, finally: Kings Rook
to QR3. Now she can take my bishop but shell lose her queen in the process. It takes Clare a
moment to realize this and when she does she sticks out her tongue at me. Her tongue is a
worrisome shade of orange from all the Doritos shes eaten.
It makes me kind of wonder about fairy tales. I mean, if youre real, then why shouldnt
fairy tales be real, too? Clare stands up, still pondering the board, and does a little dance,
hopping around like her pants are on fire. I think the ground is getting harder. My butts
asleep.
Maybe they are real. Or some little thing in them is real and then people just added to it,
you know?
Like maybe Snow White was in a coma?
And Sleeping Beauty, too.
And Jack the beanstalk guy was just a real terrific gardener.
And Noah was a weird old man with a houseboat and a lot of cats.
Clare stares at me. Noah is in the Bible. Hes not a fairy tale.
Oh. Right. Sorry. Im getting very hungry. Any minute now Nell will ring the dinner
bell and Clare will have to go in. She sits back down on her side of the board. I can tell shes
lost interest in the game when she starts building a little pyramid out of all the conquered
pieces.
You still havent proved youre real Clare says.
Neither have you.
Do you ever wonder if Im real? she asks me, surprised.
Maybe Im dreaming you. Maybe youre dreaming me; maybe we only exist in each
others dreams and every morning when we wake up we forget all about each other.
Clare frowns, and makes a motion with her hand as though to bat away this odd idea.
Pinch me, she requests. I lean over and pinch her lightly on the arm. Harder! I do it
again, hard enough to leave a white and red mark that lingers for some seconds and then
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
53
vanishes. Dont you think I would wake up, if I was asleep? Anyway, I dont feel asleep.
Well, I dont feel like a spirit. Or a fictional character.
How do you know? I mean, if I was making you up, and I didnt want you to know you
were made up, I just wouldnt tell you, right?
I wiggle my eyebrows at her. Maybe God just made us up and Hes not telling us.
You shouldnt say things like that, Clare exclaims. Besides, you dont even believe in
God. Do you?
I shrug, and change the subject. Im more real than Paul McCartney.
Clare looks worried. She starts to put all the pieces back in their box, carefully dividing
white and black. Lots of people know about Paul McCartneyIm the only one who knows
about you.
But youve actually met me, and youve never met him.
My mom went to a Beatles concert. She closes the lid of the chess set and stretches out
on the ground, staring up at the canopy of new leaves. It was at Comiskey Park, in Chicago,
August 8,1965. I poke her in the stomach and she curls up like a hedgehog, giggling. After
an interval of tickling and thrashing around, we lie on the ground with our hands clasped
across our middles and Clare asks, Is your wife a time traveler too?
Nope. Thank God.
Why thank God? I think that would be fun. You could go places together.
One time traveler per family is more than enough. Its dangerous, Clare.
Does she worry about you?
Yes, I say softly. She does. I wonder what Clare is doing now, in 1999. Maybe shes
still asleep. Maybe she wont know Im gone.
Do you love her?
Very much, I whisper. We He silently side by side, watching the swaying trees, the
birds, the sky. I hear a muffled sniffling noise and glancing at Clare I am astonished to see
that tears are streaming across her face toward her ears. I sit up and lean over her. Whats
wrong, Clare? She just shakes her head back and forth and presses her lips together. I
smooth her hair, and pull her into a sitting position, wrap my arms around her. Shes a child,
and then again she isnt. Whats wrong?
It comes out so quietly that I have to ask her to repeat it: Its just that I thought maybe
you were married to me.
Wednesday, June 27, 1984 (Clare is 13)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
54
CLARE: I am standing in the Meadow. Its late June, late afternoon; in a few minutes it will
be time to wash up for supper. The temperature is dropping. Ten minutes ago the sky was
coppery blue and there was a heavy heat over the Meadow, everything felt curved, like being
under a vast glass dome, all near noises swallowed up in the heat while an overwhelming
chorus of insects droned. I have been sitting on the tiny footbridge watching waterbugs
skating on the still small pool, thinking about Henry. Today isnt a Henry day; the next one is
twenty-two days away. It is now much cooler. Henry is puzzling to me. All my life I have
pretty much just accepted Henry as no big deal; that is, although Henry is a secret and
therefore automatically fascinating, Henry is also some kind of miracle and just recently its
started to dawn on me that most girls dont have a Henry or if they do theyve all been pretty
quiet about it. Theres a wind coming; the tall grass is rippling and I close my eyes so it
sounds like the sea (which I have never seen except on TV). When I open them the sky is
yellow and then green. Henry says he comes from the future. When I was little I didnt see
any problem with that; I didnt have any idea what it might mean. Now I wonder if it means
that the future is a place, or like a place, that I could go to; that is go to in some way other
than just getting older. I wonder if Henry could take me to the future. The woods are black
and the trees bend over and whip to the side and bow down. The insect hum is gone and the
wind is smoothing everything, the grass is flat and the trees are creaking and groaning. I am
afraid of the future; it seems to be a big box waiting for me. Henry says he knows me in the
future. Huge black clouds are moving up from behind the trees, they come up so suddenly
that I laugh, they are like puppets, and everything is swirling toward me and there is a long
low peal of thunder. I am suddenly aware of myself standing thin and upright in a Meadow
where everything has flattened itself down and so I lie down hoping to be unnoticed by the
storm which rolls up and I am flat on my back looking up when water begins to pour down
from the sky. My clothes are soaked in an instant and I suddenly feel that Henry is there, an
incredible need for Henry to be there and to put his hands on me even while it seems to me
that Henry is the rain and I am alone and wanting him.
Sunday, September 23, 1984 (Henry is 35, Clare is 13)
HENRY: I am in the clearing, in the Meadow. Its very early in the morning, just before dawn.
Its late summer, all the flowers and grasses are up to my chest. Its chilly. I am alone. I wade
through the plants and locate the clothes box, open it up, and find blue jeans and a white
oxford shirt and flip-flops. Ive never seen these clothes before, so I have no idea where I am
in time. Clare has also left me a snack: theres a peanut butter and jelly sandwich carefully
wrapped in aluminum foil, with an apple and a bag of lays potato chips. Maybe this is one of
Clares school lunches. My expectations veer in the direction of the late seventies or early
eighties. I sit down on the rock and eat the food, and then I feel much better. The sun is
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
55
rising. The whole Meadow is blue, and then orange, and pink, the shadows are elongated,
and then it is day. Theres no sign of Clare. I crawl a few feet into the vegetation, curl up on
the ground even though it is wet with dew, and sleep.
When I wake up the sun is higher and Clare is sitting next to me reading a book. She
smiles at me and says, Daylight in the swamp. The birds are singing and the frogs are
croaking and its time to get up!
I groan and rub my eyes. Hi, Clare. Whats the date?
Sunday, September 23, 1984.
Clare is thirteen. A strange and difficult age, but not as difficult as what we are going
through in my present. I sit up, and yawn. Clare, if I asked very nicely, would you go into
your house and smuggle out a cup of coffee for me?
Coffee? Clare says this as though she has never heard of the substance. As an adult she
is as much of an addict as I am. She considers the logistics.
Pretty please?
Okay, Ill try. She stands up, slowly. This is the year Clare got tall, quickly. In the past
year she has grown five inches, and she has not yet become accustomed to her new body.
Breasts and legs and hips, all newly minted. I try not to think about it as I watch her walk up
the path to the house. I glance at the book she was reading. Its a Dorothy Sayers, one I
havent read. Im on page thirty-three by the time she gets back. She has brought a Thermos,
cups, a blanket, and some doughnuts. A summers worth of sun has freckled Clares nose,
and I have to resist the urge to run my hands through her bleached hair, which falls over her
arms as she spreads out the blanket.
Bless you. I receive the Thermos as though it contains a sacrament. We settle ourselves
on the blanket. I kick off the flip-flops, pour out a cup of coffee, and take a sip. Its
incredibly strong and bitter. Yowza! This is rocket fuel, Clare.
Too strong? She looks a little depressed, and I hasten to compliment her.
Well, theres probably no such thing as too strong, but its pretty strong. I like it, though.
Did you make it?
Uh-huh. I never made coffee before, and Mark came in and was kind of bugging me, so
maybe I did it wrong.
No, its fine. I blow on the coffee, and gulp it down. I feel better immediately. I pour
another cup.
Clare takes the Thermos from me. She pours herself half an inch of coffee and takes a
cautious sip. Ugh, she says. This is disgusting. Is it supposed to taste like this?
Well, its usually a little less ferocious. You like yours with lots of cream and sugar.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
56
Clare pours the rest of her coffee into the Meadow and takes a doughnut. Then she says,
Youre making me into a freak.
I dont have a ready reply for this, since the idea has never occurred to me. Uh, no Im
not.
You are so.
Am not. I pause. What do you mean, Im making you into a freak? Im not making
you into anything.
You know, like telling me that I like coffee with cream and sugar before I hardly even
taste it. I mean, how am I going to figure out if thats what I like or if I just like it because
you tell me I like it?
But Clare, its just personal taste. You should be able to figure out how you like coffee
whether I say anything or not. Besides, youre the one whos always bugging me to tell you
about the future.
Knowing the future is different from being told what I like, Clare says.
Why? Its all got to do with free will.
Clare takes off her shoes and socks. She pushes the socks into the shoes and places them
neatly at the edge of the blanket. Then she takes my cast-off flip-flops and aligns them with
her shoes, as though the blanket is a tatami mat. I thought free will had to do with sin.
I think about this. No,  I say, why should free will be limited to right and wrong? I
mean, you just decided, of your own free will, to take off your shoes. It doesnt matter,
nobody cares if you wear shoes or not, and its not sinful, or virtuous, and it doesnt affect
the future, but youve exercised your free will
Clare shrugs. But sometimes you tell me something and I feel like the future is already
there, you know? Like my future has happened in the past and I cant do anything about it.
Thats called determinism, I tell her. It haunts my dreams.
Clare is intrigued. Why?
Well, if you are feeling boxed in by the idea that your future is unalterable, imagine how
I feel. Im constantly running up against the fact that I cant change anything, even though I
am right there, watching it.
But Henry, you do change things! I mean, you wrote down that stuff that Im supposed
to give you in 1991 about the baby with Down Syndrome, And the List, if I didnt have the
List I would never know when to come meet you. You change things all the time.
I smile. I can only do things that work toward what has already happened. I cant, for
example, undo the fact that you just took off your shoes.
Clare laughs. Why would you care if I take them off or not?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
57
I dont. But even if I did, its now an unalterable part of the history of the universe and I
cant do a thing about it. I help myself to a doughnut. Its a Bismarck, my favorite. The
frosting is melting in the sun a little, and it sticks to my fingers.
Clare finishes her doughnut, rolls up the cuffs of her jeans and sits cross-legged. She
scratches her neck and looks at me with annoyance. Now youre making me self-conscious.
I feel like every time I blow my nose its a historic event.
Well, it is.
She rolls her eyes. Whats the opposite of determinism?
Chaos.
Oh. I dont think I like that. Do you like that?
I take a big bite out of the Bismarck and consider chaos. Well, I do and I dont. Chaos is
more freedom; in fact, total freedom. But no meaning. I want to be free to act, and I also
want my actions to mean something.
But, Henry, youre forgetting about Godwhy cant there be a God who makes it mean
something? Clare frowns earnestly, and looks away across the Meadow as she speaks.
I pop the last of the Bismarck into my mouth and chew slowly to gain time. Whenever
Clare mentions God my palms start to sweat and I have an urge to hide or run or vanish.
I dont know, Clare. I mean, to me things seem too random and meaningless for there to
be a God.
Clare clasps her arms around her knees. But you just said before that everything seems
like its all planned out beforehand.
Hpmf, I say. I grab Clares ankles, pull her feet onto my lap, and hold on. Clare laughs,
and leans back on her elbows. Clares feet are cold in my hands; they are very pink and very
clean. Okay, I say, lets see. The choices were working with here are a block universe,
where past, present and future all coexist simultaneously and everything has already
happened; chaos, where anything can happen and nothing can be predicted because we cant
know all the variables; and a Christian universe in which God made everything and its all
here for a purpose but we have free will anyway. Right?
Clare wiggles her toes at me. I guess.
And what do you vote for?
Clare is silent. Her pragmatism and her romantic feelings about Jesus and Mary are, at
thirteen, almost equally balanced. A year ago she would have said God without hesitation. In
ten years she will vote for determinism, and ten years after that Clare will believe that the
universe is arbitrary, that if God exists he does not hear our prayers, that cause and effect are
inescapable and brutal, but meaningless. And after that? I dont know. But right now Clare
sits on the threshold of adolescence with her faith in one hand and her growing skepticism in
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
58
the other, and all she can do is try to juggle them, or squeeze them together until they fuse.
She shakes her head. I dont know. I want God. Is that okay?
I feel like an asshole. Of course its okay. Thats what you believe.
But I dont want to just believe it, I want it to be true.
I run my thumbs across Clares arches, and she closes her eyes. You and St. Thomas
Aquinas both, I say.
Ive heard of him, Clare says, as though shes speaking of a long-lost favorite uncle, or
the host of a TV show she used to watch when she was little.
He wanted order and reason, and God, too. He lived in the thirteenth century and taught
at the University of Paris. Aquinas believed in both Aristotle and angels.
I love angels, says Clare. Theyre so beautiful. I wish I could have wings and fly
around and sit on clouds.
Ein jeder Engel ist schrecklich.
Clare sighs, a little soft sigh that means I dont speak German, remember? Huh?
Every angel is terrifying. Its part of a series of poems called The Duino Elegies, by a
poet named Rilke. Hes one of our favorite poets.
Clare laughs. Youre doing it again!
What?
Telling me what I like. Clare burrows into my lap with her feet. Without thinking I put
her feet on my shoulders, but then that seems too sexual, somehow, and I quickly take
Clares feet in my hands again and hold them together with one hand in the air as she lies on
her back, innocent and angelic with her hair spread nimbus-like around her on the blanket. I
tickle her feet. Clare giggles and twists out of my hands like a fish, jumps up and does a
cartwheel across the clearing, grinning at me as if to dare me to come and get her. I just grin
back, and she returns to the blanket and sits down next to me.
Henry?
Yeah?
You are making me different.
I know
I turn to look at Clare and just for a moment I forget that she is young, and that this is
long ago; I see Clare, my wife, superimposed on the face of this young girl, and I dont know
what to say to this Clare who is old and young and different from other girls, who knows that
different might be hard. But Clare doesnt seem to expect an answer. She leans against my
arm, and I put my arm around her shoulders.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
59
 Clare! Across the quiet of the Meadow Clares dad is bellowing her name. Clare jumps
up and grabs her shoes and socks.
Its time for church  she says, suddenly nervous.
Okay, I say. Um, bye. I wave at her, and she smiles and mumbles goodbye and is
running up the path, and is gone. I lie in the sun for a while, wondering about God, reading
Dorothy Sayers. After an hour or so has passed I too am gone and there is only a blanket and
a book, coffee cups, and clothing, to show that we were there at all.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
60
AFTER THE END
Saturday, October 27, 1984 (Clare is 13, Henry is 43)
CLARE: I wake up suddenly. There was a noise: someone called my name. It sounded like
Henry. I sit up in bed, listening. I hear the wind, and crows calling. But what if it was Henry?
I jump out of bed and I run, with no shoes I run downstairs, out the back door, into the
Meadow. Its cold, the wind cuts right through my nightgown. Where is he? I stop and look
and there, by the orchard, theres Daddy and Mark, in their bright orange hunting clothes,
and theres a man with them, they are all standing and looking at something but then they
hear me and they turn and I see that the man is Henry. What is Henry doing with Daddy and
Mark? I run to them, my feet cut by the dead grasses, and Daddy walks to meet me.
Sweetheart, he says, what are you doing out here so early?
I heard my name I say. He smiles at me. Silly girl, his smile says, and I look at Henry,
to see if he will explain. Why did you call me, Henry? but he shakes his head and puts his
finger to his lips, Shhh, dont tell, Clare. He walks into the orchard and I want to see what
they were looking at but theres nothing there and Daddy says, Go back to bed, Clare, it was
just a dream. He puts his arm around me and begins to walk back toward the house with me
and I look back at Henry and he waves, hes smiling, Its okay, Clare, Ill explain later
(although knowing Henry he probably wont explain, hell make me figure it out or it will
explain itself one of these days). I wave back at him, and then I check to see if Mark saw that
but Mark has his back to us, hes irritated and is waiting for me to go away so he and Daddy
can go back to hunting, but what is Henry doing here, what did they say to each other? I look
back again but I dont see Henry and Daddy says, Go on, now, Clare, go back to bed, and
he kisses my forehead. He seems upset and so I run, run back to the house, and then softly up
the stairs and then I am sitting on my bed, shivering, and I still dont know what just
happened, but I know it was bad, it was very, very bad.
Monday, February 2, 1987 (Clare is 15, Henry is 38)
CLARE: When I get home from school Henry is waiting for me in the Reading Room. I have
fixed a little room for him next to the furnace room; its on the opposite side from where all
the bicycles are. I have allowed it to be known in my household that I like to spend time in
the basement reading, and I do in fact spend a lot of time in here, so that it doesnt seem
unusual. Henry has a chair wedged under the doorknob. I knock four knocks and he lets me
in. He has made a sort of nest out of pillows and chair cushions and blankets, he has been
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
61
reading old magazines under my desk lamp. He is wearing Dads old jeans and a plaid
flannel shirt, and he looks tired and unshaven. I left the back door unlocked for him this
morning and here he is.
I set the tray of food I have brought on the floor. I could bring down some books.
Actually, these are great. Hes been reading Mad magazines from the 60s. And this is
indispensable for time travelers who need to know all sorts of factoids at a moments notice,
he says, holding up the 1968 World Almanac.
I sit down next to him on the blankets, and look over at him to see if hes going to make
me move. I can see hes thinking about it, so I hold up my hands for him to see and then I sit
on them. He smiles. Make yourself at home, he says.
When are you coming from?
2001. October
You look tired. I can see that hes debating about telling me why hes tired, and decides
against it. What are we up to in 2001?
Big things. Exhausting things. Henry starts to eat the roast beef sandwich I have
brought him. Hey, this is good.
Nell made it.
He laughs. Ill never understand why it is that you can build huge sculptures that
withstand gale force winds, deal with dye recipes, cook kozo, and all that, and you cant do
anything whatsoever with food. Its amazing.
Its a mental block. A phobia.
Its weird.
I walk into the kitchen and I hear this little voice saying, Go away. So I do.
Are you eating enough? You look thin.
I feel fat. Im eating. I have a dismal thought. Am I very fat in 2001? Maybe thats
why you think Im too thin.
Henry smiles at some joke I dont get. Well, youre kind of plump at the moment, in my
present, but it will pass.
Ugh.
Plump is good. It will look very good on you.
No thanks. Henry looks at me, worrying. You know, Im not anorexic or anything. I
mean, you dont have to worry about it.
Well, its just that your mom was always bugging you about it.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
62
Was?
Is.
Why did you say was?
No reason. Lucille is fine. Dont worry. Hes lying. My stomach tightens and I wrap my
arms around my knees and put my head down.
HENRY: I cannot believe that I have made a slip of the tongue of this magnitude. I stroke
Clares hair, and I wish fervently that I could go back to my present for just a minute, long
enough to consult Clare, to find out what I should say to her, at fifteen, about her mothers
death. Its because Im not getting any sleep. If I was getting some sleep I would have been
thinking faster, or at least covering better for my lapse. But Clare, who is the most truthful
person I know, is acutely sensitive to even small lies, and now the only alternatives are to
refuse to say anything, which will make her frantic, or to lie, which she wont accept, or to
tell the truth, which will upset her and do strange things to her relationship with her mother.
Clare looks at me. Tell me, she says.
CLARE: Henry looks miserable. I cant, Clare.
Why not?
Its not good to know things ahead. It screws up your life.
Yes. But you cant half tell me.
Theres nothing to tell.
Im really beginning to panic. She killed herself. I am flooded with certainty. It is the
thing I have always feared most.
 No. No. Absolutely not.
I stare at him. Henry just looks very unhappy. I cannot tell if he is telling the truth. If I
could only read his mind, how much easier life would be. Mama. Oh, Mama.
HENRY: This is dreadful. I cant leave Clare with this. Ovarian cancer, I say, very quietly.
Thank God, she says, and begins to cry.
Friday, June 5, 1987 (Clare is 16, Henry is 32)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
63
CLARE: Ive been waiting all day for Henry. Im so excited. I got my drivers license
yesterday, and Daddy said I could take the Fiat to Ruths party tonight. Mama doesnt like
this at all, but since Daddy has already said yes she cant do much about it. I can hear them
arguing in the library after dinner.
You could have asked me
It seemed harmless, Lucy....
I take my book and walk out to the Meadow. I lie down in the grass. The sun is beginning
to set. Its cool out here, and the grass is full of little white moths. The sky is pink and orange
over the trees in the west, and an arc of deepening blue over me. I am thinking about going
back to the house and getting a sweater when I hear someone walking through the grass. Sure
enough, its Henry. He enters the clearing and sits down on the rock. I spy on him from the
grass. He looks fairly young, early thirties maybe. Hes wearing the plain black T-shirt and
jeans and hi-tops. Hes just sitting quietly, waiting. I cant wait a minute longer, myself, and
I jump up and startle him.
Jesus, Clare, dont give the geezer a heart attack.
Youre not a geezer.
Henry smiles. Hes funny about being old.
Kiss, I demand, and he kisses me.
What was that for? he asks.
I got my drivers license!
Henry looks alarmed. Oh, no. I mean, congratulations.
I smile at him; nothing he says can ruin my mood. Youre just jealous.
I am, in fact. I love to drive, and I never do.
How come?
Too dangerous.
Chicken.
I mean for other people. Imagine what would happen if I was driving and I disappeared?
The car would still be moving and kaboom! lots of dead people and blood. Not pretty.
I sit down on the rock next to Henry. He moves away. I ignore this. Im going to a party
at Ruths tonight. Want to come?
He raises one eyebrow. This usually means hes going to quote from a book Ive never
heard of or lecture me about something. Instead he only says, But Clare, that would involve
meeting a whole bunch of your friends.
Why not? Im tired of being all secretive about this.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
64
Lets see. Youre sixteen. Im thirty-two right now, only twice your age. Im sure no one
would even notice, and your parents would never hear about it.
I sigh. Well, I have to go to this party. Come with and sit in the car and I wont stay in
very long and then we can go somewhere.
HENRY: We park about a block away from Ruths house. I can hear the music all the way
down here; its Talking Heads Once In A Lifetime. I actually kind of wish I could go with
Clare, but it would be unwise. She hops out of the car and says, Stay! as though I am a
large, disobedient dog, and totters off in her heels and short skirt toward Ruths. I slump
down and wait.
CLARE: AS soon as I walk in the door I know this party is a mistake. Ruths parents are in
San Francisco for a week, so at least she will have some time to repair, clean, and explain,
but Im glad its not my house all the same. Ruths older brother, Jake, has also invited his
friends, and altogether there are about a hundred people here and all of them are drunk. There
are more guys than girls and I wish I had worn pants and flats, but its too late to do anything
about it. As I walk into the kitchen to get a drink someone behind me says, Check out Miss
Look-But-Dont-Touch! and makes an obscene slurping sound. I spin around and see the
guy we call Lizardface (because of his acne) leering at me. Nice dress, Clare.
Thanks, but its not for your benefit, Lizardface.
He follows me into the kitchen. Now, thats not a very nice thing to say, young lady.
After all, Im just trying to express my appreciation of your extremely comely attire, and all
you can do is insult me...He wont shut up. I finally escape by grabbing Helen and using her
as a human shield to get out of the kitchen.
This sucks, says Helen. Wheres Ruth?
Ruth is hiding upstairs in her bedroom with Laura. They are smoking a joint in the dark
and watching out the window as a bunch of Jakes friends skinny dip in the pool. Soon we
are all sitting in the window seat gawking.
Mmm, says Helen. Id like some of that.
Which one? Ruth asks.
The guy on the diving board.
Ooh.
Look at Ron, says Laura.
Thats Ron? Ruth giggles.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
65
Wow. Well, I guess anyone would look better without the Metallica T-shirt and the
skanky leather vest, Helen says. Hey, Clare, youre awfully quiet.
Um? Yeah, I guess, I say weakly.
Look at you, says Helen. You are, like, cross-eyed with lust. I am ashamed of you.
How could you let yourself get into such a state? She laughs. Seriously, Clare, why dont
you just get it over with?
I cant, I say miserably.
Sure you can. Just walk downstairs and yell Fuck me! and about fifty guys would be
yelling Me! Me!
You dont understand. I dont wantits not that
She wants somebody in particular, Ruth says, without taking her eyes off the pool.
Who? Helen asks.
I shrug my shoulders.
Come on, Clare, spit it out.
Leave her alone, Laura says. If Clare doesnt want to say, she doesnt have to. I am
sitting next to Laura, and I lean my head on her shoulder.
Helen bounces up. Ill be right back.
Where you going?
I brought some champagne and pear juice to make Bellinis, but I left it in the car. She
dashes out the door. A tall guy with shoulder-length hair does a backwards somersault off the
diving board.
Ooh la la, say Ruth and Laura in unison.
HENRY: A long time has passed, maybe an hour or so. I eat half the potato chips and drink
the warm Coke Clare has brought along. I nap a bit. Shes gone for so long that Im starting
to consider going for a walk. Also I need to take a leak.
I hear heels tapping toward me. I look out the window, but its not Clare, its this
bombshell blond girl in a tight red dress. I blink, and realize that this is Clares friend Helen
Powell. Uh oh.
She clicks over to my side of the car, leans over and peers at me. I can see right down her
dress to Tokyo. I feel slightly woozy,
Hi, Clares boyfriend. Im Helen.
Wrong number, Helen. But pleased to meet you. Her breath is highly alcoholic.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
66
Arent you going to get out of the car and be properly introduced?
Oh, Im pretty comfortable where I am, thanks.
Well, Ill just join you in there, then. She moves uncertainly around the front of the car,
opens the door, and plops herself into the drivers seat.
Ive been wanting to meet you for the longest time, Helen confides.
You have? Why? I desperately wish Clare would come and rescue me, but then that
would give the game away, wouldnt it?
Helen leans toward me and says, sotto voce, I deduced your existence. My vast powers
of observation have led me to the conclusion that whatever remains when you have
eliminated the impossible, is the truth, no matter how impossible. Hence, Helen pauses to
burp. How unladylike. Excuse me. Hence, I have concluded that Clare must have a
boyfriend, because otherwise, she would not be refusing to fuck all these very nice boys who
are very much distressed about it. And here you are. Ta da!
Ive always liked Helen, and I am sad to have to mislead her. This does explain something
she said to me at our wedding, though. I love it when little puzzle pieces drop into place like
this.
Thats very compelling reasoning, Helen, but Im not Clares boyfriend.
Then why are you sitting in her car?
I have a brainstorm. Clare is going to kill me for this. Im a friend of Clares parents.
They were worried about her taking the car to a party where there might be alcohol, so they
asked me to go along and play chauffeur in case she got too pickled to drive.
Helen pouts. Thats extremely not necessary. Our little Clare hardly drinks enough to fill
a tiny, tiny thimble
I never said she did. Her parents were just being paranoid.
High heels click down the sidewalk. This time it is Clare. She freezes when she sees that I
have company.
Helen jumps out of the car and says, Clare! This naughty man says he is not your
boyfriend.
Clare and I exchange glances. Well, hes not, says Clare curtly.
Oh, says Helen. Are you leaving?
Its almost midnight. Im about to turn into a pumpkin. Clare walks around the car and
opens her door. Come on, Henry, lets go. She starts the car and flips on the lights.
Helen stands stock still in the headlights. Then she walks over to my side of the car. Not
her boyfriend, huh, Henry? You had me going there for a minute, yes you did. Bye bye,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
67
Clare. She laughs, and Clare pulls out of the parking space awkwardly and drives away.
Ruth lives on Conger. As we turn onto Broadway, I see that all the street lights are off.
Broadway is a two-lane highway. Its ruler-straight, but without the streetlights its like
driving into an inkwell.
Better turn on your brights, Clare, I say. She reaches forward and turns the headlights
off completely.
Clare!
Dont tell me what to do! I shut up. All I can see are the illuminated numbers of the
clock radio. Its 11:36.I hear the air rushing past the car, the engine of the car; I feel the
wheels passing over the asphalt, but somehow we seem to be motionless, and the world
moves around us at forty-five miles per hour. I close my eyes. It makes no difference. I open
them. My heart is pounding.
Headlights appear in the distance. Clare turns her lights on and we are rushing along
again, perfectly aligned between the yellow stripes in the middle of the road and the edge of
the highway. Its 11:38.
Clare is expressionless in the reflected dashboard lights. Why did you do that? I ask her,
my voice shaking.
Why not? Clares voice is calm as a summer pond.
Because we could have both died in a fiery wreck?
Clare slows and turns onto Blue Star Highway. But thats not what happens she says. I
grow up and meet you and we get married and here you are.
For all you know you crashed the car just then and we both spent a year in traction.
But then you would have warned me not to do it, says Clare.
I tried, but you yelled at me
I mean, an older you would have told a younger me not to crash the car.
Well, by then it would have already happened.
We have reached Meagram Lane, and Clare turns onto it. This is the private road that
leads to her house. Pull over, Clare, okay? Please? Clare drives onto the grass, stops, cuts
the engine and the lights. Its completely dark again, and I can hear a million cicadas singing.
I reach over and pull Clare close to me, put my arm around her. She is tense and unpliant.
Promise me something.
What? Clare asks.
Promise you wont do anything like that again. I mean not just with the car, but anything
dangerous. Because you dont know. The future is weird, and you cant go around behaving
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
68
like youre invincible
But if youve seen me in the future
Trust me. Just trust me.
Clare laughs. Why would I want to do that?
I dunno. Because I love you?
Clare turns her head so quickly that she hits me in the jaw,
Ouch.
Sorry. I can barely see the outline of her profile. You love me? she asks.
Yes.
Right now?
Yes.
But youre not my boyfriend.
Oh. Thats whats bugging her. Well, technically speaking, Im your husband. Since you
havent actually gotten married yet, I suppose we would have to say that you are my
girlfriend.
Clare puts her hand someplace it probably shouldnt be. Id rather be your mistress.
Youre sixteen, Clare. I gently remove her hand, and stroke her face.
Thats old enough. Ugh, your hands are all wet. Clare turns on the overhead light and I
am startled to see that her face and dress are streaked with blood. I look at my palms and they
are sticky and red. Henry! Whats wrong?
I dont know. I lick my right palm and four deep crescent-shaped cuts appear in a row. I
laugh. Its from my fingernails. When you were driving without the headlights.
Clare snaps off the overhead light and we are sitting in the dark again. The cicadas sing
with all their might. I didnt mean to scare you.
Yeah, you did. But usually I feel safe when youre driving. Its just
What?
I was in a car accident when I was a kid, and I dont like to ride in cars.
OhIm sorry.
S okay. Hey, what time is it?
Oh my God. Clare flips the light on. 12:12. Im late. And how can I walk in all bloody
like this? She looks so distraught that I want to laugh.
Here. I rub my left palm across her upper lip and under her nose. You have a
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
69
nosebleed.
Okay. She starts the car, flips on the headlights, and eases back onto the road. Ettas
going to freak when she sees me.
Etta? What about your parents?
Mamas probably asleep by now, and its Daddys poker night. Clare opens the gate
and we pass through.
If my kid was out with the car the day after she got her license I would be sitting next to
the front door with a stopwatch. Clare stops the car out of sight of the house.
Do we have kids?
Sorry, thats classified.
Im gonna apply for that one under the Freedom of Information Act.
Be my guest. I kiss her carefully, so as not to disturb the faux nosebleed. Let me know
what you find out. I open the car door. Good luck with Etta.
Good night.
Night. I get out and close the door as quietly as possible. The car glides down the drive,
around the bend and into the night. I walk after it toward a bed in the Meadow under the
stars.
Sunday, September 27, 1987 (Henry is 32, Clare is 16)
HENRY: I materialize in the Meadow, about fifteen feet west of the clearing. I feel dreadful,
dizzy and nauseated, so I sit for a few minutes to pull myself together. Its chilly and gray,
and I am submerged in the tall brown grass, which cuts into my skin. After a while I feel a
little better, and its quiet, so I stand up and walk into the clearing.
Clare is sitting on the ground, next to the rock, leaning against it. She doesnt say
anything, just looks at me with what I can only describe as anger. Uh oh, I think. What have I
done? Shes in her Grace Kelly phase; shes wearing her blue wool coat and a red skirt. Im
shivering, and I hunt for the clothes box. I find it, and don black jeans, a black sweater, black
wool socks, a black overcoat, black boots, and black leather gloves, I look like Im about to
star in a Wim Wenders film. I sit down next to Clare.
Hi, Clare. Are you okay?
Hi, Henry. Here. She hands me a Thermos and two sandwiches.
Thanks. I feel kind of sick, so Ill wait a little. I set the food on the rock. The Thermos
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
70
contains coffee; I inhale deeply. Just the smell makes me feel better. Are you all right?
Shes not looking at me. As I scrutinize Clare, I realize that shes been crying.
Henry. Would you beat someone up for me?
What?
I want to hurt someone, and Im not big enough, and I dont know how to fight. Will you
do it for me?
Whoa. What are you talking about? Who? Why?
Clare stares at her lap. I dont want to talk about it. Couldnt you just take my word that
he totally deserves it?
I think I know whats going on; I think Ive heard this story before. I sigh, and move
closer to Clare, and put my arm around her. She leans her head on my shoulder.
This is about some guy you went on a date with, right?
Yeah.
And he was a jerk, and now you want me to pulverize him?
Yeah.
Clare, lots of guys are jerks. I used to be a jerk
Clare laughs. I bet you werent as big of a jerk as Jason Everleigh.
Hes a football player or something, right?
Yes.
Clare, what makes you think I can take on some huge jock half my age? Why were you
even going out with someone like that?
She shrugs. At school, everybodys been bugging me cause I never date anyone. Ruth
and Meg and NancyI mean, there are all these rumors going around that Im a lesbian.
Even Mama is asking me why I dont go out with boys. Guys ask me out, and I turn them
down. And then Beatrice Dilford, who is a dyke, asked me if I was, and I told her no, and she
said that she wasnt surprised, but thats what everybody was saying, so then I thought, well,
maybe Id better go out with a few guys. So the next one who asked was Jason. Hes, like,
this jock, and hes really good looking, and I knew that if I went out with him everyone
would know, and I thought maybe they would shut up.
So this was the first time you went out on a date?
Yeah. We went to this Italian restaurant and Laura and Mike were there, and a bunch of
people from Theater class, and I offered to go Dutch but he said no, he never did that, and it
was okay, I mean, we talked about school and stuff, football. Then we went to see Friday the
13th, Part VII, which was really stupid, in case you were thinking of seeing it,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
71
Ive seen it.
Oh. Why? It doesnt seem like your kind of thing.
Same reason you did; my date wanted to see it.
Who was your date?
A woman named Alex.
What was she like?
A bank teller with big tits who liked to be spanked. The second this pops out of my
mouth I realize that I am talking to Clare the teenager, not Clare my wife, and I mentally
smack myself in the head.
Spanked? Clare looks at me, smiling, her eyebrows halfway to her hairline.
Never mind. So you went to a movie, and...?
Oh. Well, then he wanted to go to Travers.
What is Travers?
Its a farm on the north side. Clares voice drops, I can hardly hear her. Its where
people go to...make out. I dont say anything. So I told him I was tired, and wanted to go
home, and then he got kind of, urn, mad. Clare stops talking; for a while we sit, listening to
birds, airplanes, wind. Suddenly Clare says, He was really mad.
What happened then?
He wouldnt take me home. I wasnt sure where we were; somewhere out on Route 12,
he was just driving around, down little lanes, God, I dont know. He drove down this dirt
road, and there was this little cottage. There was a lake nearby, I could hear it. And he had
the key to this place.
Im getting nervous. Clare never told me any of this; just that she once went on a really
horrible date with some guy named Jason, who was a football player. Clare has fallen silent
again.
Clare. Did he rape you?
No. He said I wasnt.. .good enough. He saidno, he didnt rape me. He justhurt me.
He made me.. She cant say it. I wait. Clare unbuttons her coat, and removes it. She peels
her shirt off, and I see that her back is covered with bruises. They are dark and purple against
her white skin. Clare turns and there is a cigarette burn on her right breast, blistered and ugly.
I asked her once what that scar was, and she wouldnt say. I am going to kill this guy. I am
going to cripple him. Clare sits before me, shoulders back, gooseflesh, waiting. I hand her
her shirt, and she puts it on.
All right, I tell her quietly. Where do I find this guy?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
72
Ill drive you, she says.
Clare picks me up in the Fiat at the end of the driveway, out of sight of the house. Shes
wearing sunglasses even though its a dim afternoon, and lipstick, and her hair is coiled at the
back of her head. She looks a lot older than sixteen. She looks like she just walked out of
Rear Window, though the resemblance would be more perfect if she was blond. We speed
through the fall trees, but I dont think either of us notices much color. A tape loop of what
happened to Clare in that little cottage has begun to play repeatedly in my head.
How big is he?
Clare considers. A couple inches taller than you. A lot heavier. Fifty pounds?
Christ.
I brought this. Clare digs in her purse and produces a handgun.
Clare!
Its Daddys.
I think fast. Clare, thats a bad idea. I mean, Im mad enough to actually use it, and that
would be stupid. Ah, wait. I take it from her, open the chamber, and remove the bullets and
put them in her purse. There. Thats better. Brilliant idea, Clare. Clare looks at me,
questioning. I stick the gun in my overcoat pocket. Do you want me to do this
anonymously, or do you want him to know its from you?
I want to be there.
Oh.
She pulls into a private lane and stops. I want to take him somewhere and I want you to
hurt him very badly and I want to watch. I want him scared shitless.
I sigh. Clare, I dont usually do this kind of thing. I usually fight in self-defense, for one
thing.
Please. It comes out of her mouth absolutely flat.
Of course. We continue down the drive, and stop in front of a large, new faux Colonial
house. There are no cars visible. Van Halen emanates from an open second-floor window.
We walk to the front door and I stand to the side while Clare rings the bell. After a moment
the music abruptly stops and heavy footsteps clump down stairs. The door opens, and after a
pause a deep voice says, What? You come back for more? Thats all I need to hear. I draw
the gun and step to Clares side. I point it at the guys chest.
Hi, Jason, Clare says. I thought you might like to come out with us.
He does the same thing I would do, drops and rolls out of range, but he doesnt do it fast
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
73
enough. Im in the door and I take a flying leap onto his chest and knock the wind out of him.
I stand up, put my boot on his chest, point the gun at his head. Cest magnifique mais ce
nestpas la guerre. He looks kind of like Tom Cruise, very pretty, all-American. What
position does he play? I ask Clare.
Halfback.
Hmm. Never would of guessed. Get up, hands up where I can see them, I tell him
cheerfully. He complies, and I walk him out the door. We are all standing in the driveway. I
have an idea. I send Clare back into the house for rope; she comes out a few minutes later
with scissors and duct tape.
Where do you want to do this?
The woods.
Jason is panting as we march him into the woods. We walk for about five minutes, and
then I see a little clearing with a handy young elm at the edge of it. How about this, Clare?
Yeah.
I look at her. She is completely impassive, cool as a Raymond Chandler murderess. Call
it, Clare.
Tie him to the tree. I hand her the gun, jerk Jasons hands into position behind the tree,
and duct tape them together. Theres almost a full roll of duct tape, and I intend to use all of
it. Jason is breathing strenuously, wheezing. I step around him and look at Clare. She looks at
Jason as though he is a bad piece of conceptual art. Are you asthmatic?
He nods. His pupils are contracted into tiny points of black. Ill get his inhaler, says
Clare. She hands the gun back to me and ambles off through the woods along the path we
came down. Jason is trying to breathe slowly and carefully. He is trying to talk.
Who...are you? he asks, hoarsely.
Im Clares boyfriend. Im here to teach you manners, since you have none. I drop my
mocking tone, and walk close to him, and say softly, How could you do that to her? Shes
so young. She doesnt know anything, and now youve completely fucked up everything...
Shes a.. .cock.. .tease.
She has no idea. Its like torturing a kitten because it bit you.
Jason doesnt answer. His breath comes in long, shivering whinnies. Just as I am
becoming concerned, Clare arrives. She holds up the inhaler, looks at me. Darling, do you
know how to use this thing?
I think you shake it and then put it in his mouth and press down on the top. She does
this, asks him if he wants more. He nods. After four inhalations, we stand and watch him
gradually subside into more normal breathing.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
74
Ready? I ask Clare.
She holds up the scissors, makes a few cuts in the air. Jason flinches. Clare walks over to
him, kneels, and begins to cut off his clothes. Hey, says Jason.
Please be quiet, I say. No one is hurting you. At the moment. Clare finishes cutting
off his jeans and starts on his T-shirt. I start to duct tape him to the tree. I begin at his ankles,
and wind very neatly up his calves and thighs. Stop there, Clare says, indicating a point
just below Jasons crotch. She snips off his underwear. I start to tape his waist. His skin is
clammy and hes very tan everywhere except inside a crisp outline of a Speedo-type bathing
suit. Hes sweating heavily. I wind all the way up to his shoulders, and stop, because I want
him to be able to breathe. We step back and admire our work. Jason is now a duct-tape
mummy with a large erection. Clare begins to laugh. Her laugh sounds spooky, echoing
through the woods. I look at her sharply. Theres something knowing and cruel in Clares
laugh, and it seems to me that this moment is the demarcation, a sort of no-mans-land
between Clares childhood and her life as a woman.
What next? I inquire. Part of me wants to turn him into hamburger and part of me
doesnt want to beat up somebody whos taped to a tree.
Jason is bright red. It contrasts nicely with the gray duct tape.
Oh, says Clare. You know, I think thats enough.
I am relieved. So of course I say, You sure? I mean there are all sorts of things I could
do. Break his eardrums? Nose? Oh, wait, hes already broken it once himself. We could cut
his Achilles tendons. He wouldnt be playing football in the near future.
No! Jason strains against the tape.
Apologize, then, I tell him.
Jason hesitates. Sorry.
Thats pretty pathetic
I know, Clare says. She fishes around in her purse and finds a Magic Marker. She walks
up to Jason as though he is a dangerous zoo animal, and begins to write on his duct-taped
chest. When shes done, she stands back and caps her marker. Shes written an account of
their date. She sticks the marker back in her purse and says, Lets go.
You know, we cant just leave him. He might have another asthma attack.
Hmm. Okay, I know. Ill call some people.
Wait a minute, says Jason.
What? says Clare.
Who are you calling? Call Rob.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
75
Clare laughs. Uh-uh. Im going to call every girl I know.
I walk over to Jason and place the muzzle of the gun under his chin. If you mention my
existence to one human and I find out about it I will come back and I will devastate you. You
wont be able to walk, talk, eat, or fuck when Im done. As far as you know, Clare is a nice
girl who for some inexplicable reason doesnt date. Right?
Jason looks at me with hatred. Right.
Weve dealt with you very leniently, here. If you hassle Clare again in any way you will
be sorry.
Okay.
Good. I place the gun back in my pocket. Its been fun.
Listen, dickface
Oh, what the hell. I step back and put my whole weight into a side kick to the groin. Jason
screams. I turn and look at Clare, who is white under her makeup. Tears are running down
Jasons face. I wonder if hes going to pass out. Lets go, I say. Clare nods. We walk back
to the car, subdued. I can hear Jason yelling at us. We climb in, Clare starts the car, turns,
and rockets down the driveway and onto the street.
I watch her drive. Its beginning to rain. Theres a satisfied smile playing around the
edges of her mouth. Is that what you wanted? I ask.
Yes, says Clare. That was perfect. Thank you.
My pleasure. Im getting dizzy. I think Im almost gone.
Clare pulls onto a sidestreet. The rain is drumming on the car. Its like riding through a
car wash. Kiss me, she demands. I do, and then Im gone.
Monday, September 28, 1987 (Clare is 16)
CLARE: At school on Monday, everybody looks at me but no one will speak to me. I feel like
Harriet the Spy after her classmates found her spy notebook. Walking down the hall is like
parting the Red Sea. When I walk into English, first period, everyone stops talking. I sit
down next to Ruth. She smiles and looks worried. I dont say anything either but then I feel
her hand on mine under the table, hot and small. Ruth holds my hand for a moment and then
Mr. Partaki walks in and she takes her hand away and Mr. Partaki notices that everyone is
uncharacteristically silent. He says mildly, Did you all have a nice weekend? and Sue
Wong says, Oh, yes and theres a shimmer of nervous laughter around the room. Partaki is
puzzled, and theres an awful pause. Then he says, Well, great, then let s embark on Billy
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
76
Budd. In 1851, Herman Melville published Moby-Dick, or, The Whale, which was greeted
with resounding indifference by the American public... Its all lost on me. Even with a
cotton undershirt on, my sweater feels abrasive, and my ribs hurt. My classmates arduously
fumble their way through a discussion of Billy Budd. Finally the bell rings, and they escape. I
follow, slowly, and Ruth walks with me.
Are you okay? she asks.
Mostly.
I did what you said.
What time?
Around six. I was afraid his parents would come home and find him. It was hard to cut
him out. The tape ripped off all his chest hair.
Good. Did a lot of people see him?
Yeah, everybody. Well, all the girls. No guys, as far as I know. The halls are almost
empty. Im standing in front of my French classroom. Clare, I understand why you did it,
but what I dont get is how you did it.
I had some help.
The passing bell rings and Ruth jumps. Oh my god. Ive been late to gym five times in a
row! She moves away as though repelled by a strong magnetic field. Tell me at lunch,
Ruth calls as I turn and walk into Madame Simones room.
 Ah, Mademoiselle Abshire, asseyez-vous, sil vous plait. I sit between Laura and Helen.
Helen writes me a note: Good for you. The class is translating Montaigne. We work quietly,
and Madame walks around the room, correcting. Im having trouble concentrating. The look
on Henrys face after he kicked Jason: utterly indifferent, as though he had just shaken his
hand, as though he was thinking about nothing in particular, and then he was worried
because he didnt know how I would react, and I realized that Henry enjoyed hurting Jason,
and is that the same as Jason enjoying hurting me? But Henry is good. Does that make it
okay? Is it okay that I wanted him to do it?
 Clare, attendez Madame says, at my elbow.
After the bell once again everyone bolts out. I walk with Helen. Laura hugs me
apologetically and runs off to her music class at the other end of the building. Helen and I
both have third-period gym.
Helen laughs. Well, dang, girl. I couldnt believe my eyes. Howd you get him taped to
that tree?
I can tell Im going to get tired of that question. I have a friend who does things like that.
He helped me out.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
77
Who is he?
A client of my dads, I lie.
Helen shakes her head. Youre such a bad liar. I smile, and say nothing.
Its Henry, right?
I shake my head, and put my finger to my lips. We have arrived at the girls gym. We
walk into the locker room and abracadabra! all the girls stop talking. Then theres a low
ripple of talk that fills the silence. Helen and I have our lockers in the same bay. I open mine
and take out my gym suit and shoes. I have thought about what I am going to do. I take off
my shoes and stockings, strip down to my undershirt and panties. Im not wearing a bra
because it hurt too much.
Hey, Helen, I say. I peel off my shirt, and Helen turns.
Jesus Christ, Clare! The bruises look even worse than they did yesterday. Some of them
are greenish. There are welts on my thighs from Jasons belt. Oh, Clare. Helen walks to
me, and puts her arms around me, carefully. The room is silent, and I look over Helens
shoulder and see that all the girls have gathered around us, and they are all looking. Helen
straightens up, and looks back at them, and says, Well? and someone in the back starts to
clap, and they are all clapping, and laughing, and talking, and cheering, and I feel light, light
as air.
Wednesday, July 12, 1995 (Clare is 24, Henry is 32)
CLARE: Im lying in bed, almost asleep, when I feel Henrys hand brushing over my stomach
and realize hes back. I open my eyes and he bends down and kisses the little cigarette burn
scar, and in the dim night light I touch his face. Thank you, I say, and he says, It was my
pleasure, and that is the only time we ever speak of it.
Sunday, September 11, 1988 (Henry is 36, Clare is 17)
HENRY: Clare and I are in the Orchard on a warm September afternoon. Insects drone in the
Meadow under golden sun. Everything is still, and as I look across the dry grasses the air
shimmers with warmth. We are under an apple tree. Clare leans against its trunk with a
pillow under her to cushion the tree roots. I am lying stretched out with my head in her lap.
We have eaten, and the remains of our lunch lie scattered around us, with fallen apples
interspersed. I am sleepy and content. It is January in my present, and Clare and I are
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
78
struggling. This summer interlude is idyllic.
Clare says, Id like to draw you, just like that.
Upside down and asleep?
Relaxed. You look so peaceful.
Why not? Go ahead. We are out here in the first place because Clare is supposed to be
drawing trees for her art class. She picks up her sketchbook and retrieves the charcoal. She
balances the book on her knee. Do you want me to move? I ask her.
No, that would change it too much. As you were, please. I resume staring idly at the
patterns the branches make against the sky.
Stillness is a discipline. I can hold quite still for long stretches of time when Im reading,
but sitting for Clare is always surprisingly difficult.
Even a pose that seems very comfortable at first becomes torture after fifteen minutes or
so. Without moving anything but my eyes, I look at Clare. She is deep in her drawing. When
Clare draws she looks as though the world has fallen away, leaving only her and the object of
her scrutiny. This is why I love to be drawn by Clare: when she looks at me with that kind of
attention, I feel that I am everything to her. Its the same look she gives me when were
making love. Just at this moment she looks into my eyes and smiles.
I forgot to ask you: when are you coming from?
January, 2000.
Her face falls. Really? I thought maybe a little later.
Why? Do I look so old?
Clare strokes my nose. Her fingers travel across the bridge and over my brows. No, you
dont. But you seem happy and calm, and usually when you come from 1998, or 99 or 2000,
youre upset, or freaked out, and you wont tell me why. And then in 2001 youre okay
again.
I laugh. You sound like a fortune teller. I never realized you were tracking my moods so
closely.
What else have I got to go on?
Remember, its stress that usually sends me in your direction, here. So you shouldnt get
the idea that those years are unremittingly horrible. There are lots of nice things in those
years, too.
Clare goes back to her drawing. She has given up asking me about our future. Instead she
asks, Henry, what are you afraid of?
The question surprises me and I have to think about it. Cold, I say. I am afraid of
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
79
winter. I am afraid of police. I am afraid of traveling to the wrong place and time and getting
hit by a car or beat up. Or getting stranded in time, and not being able to come back. I am
afraid of losing you.
Clare smiles. How could you lose me? Im not going anywhere.
I worry that you will get tired of putting up with my undependableness and you will
leave me.
Clare puts her sketchbook aside. I sit up. I wont ever leave you, she says. Even
though youre always leaving me.
But I never want to leave you.
Clare shows me the drawing. Ive seen it before; it hangs next to Clares drawing table in
her studio at home. In the drawing I do look peaceful. Clare signs it and begins to write the
date. Dont, I say. Its not dated.
Its not?
Ive seen it before. Theres no date on it.
Okay. Clare erases the date and writes Meadowlark on it instead. Done. She looks at
me, puzzled. Do you ever find that you go back to your present and something has changed?
I mean, what if I wrote the date on this drawing right now? What would happen?
I dont know. Try it, I say, curious. Clare erases the word Meadowlark and writes
September 11, 1988.
There, she says, that was easy. We look at each other, bemused. Clare laughs. If Ive
violated the space-time continuum it isnt very obvious.
Ill let you know if youve just caused World War III. Im starting to feel shaky. I
think Im going, Clare. She kisses me, and Im gone.
Thursday, January 13, 2000 (Henry is 36, Clare is 28)
HENRY: After dinner Im still thinking about Clares drawing, so I walk out to her studio to
look at it. Clare is making a huge sculpture out of tiny wisps of purple paper; it looks like a
cross between a Muppet and a birds nest. I walk around it carefully and stand in front of her
table. The drawing is not there.
Clare comes in carrying an armful of abaca fiber. Hey. She throws it on the floor and
walks over to me. Whats up?
Wheres that drawing that used to hang right there? The one of me?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
80
Huh? Oh, I dont know. Maybe it fell down. Clare dives under the table and says, I
dont see it. Oh, wait here it is. She emerges holding the drawing between two fingers.
Ugh, its all cobwebby. She brushes it off and hands it to me. I look it over. Theres still no
date on it.
What happened to the date?
What date?
You wrote the date at the bottom, here. Under your name. It looks like its been trimmed
off.
Clare laughs. Okay. I confess. I trimmed it.
Why?
I got all freaked by your World War III comment. I started thinking, what if we never
meet in the future because I insisted on testing this out?
Im glad you did.
Why?
I dont know. I just am. We stare at each other, and then Clare smiles, and I shrug, and
thats that. But why does it seem as though something impossible almost happened? Why do
I feel so relieved?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
81
CHRISTMAS EVE, ONE ALWAYS CRASHING IN
THE SAME CAR
Saturday, December 24, 1988 (Henry is 40, Clare is 17)
HENRY: Its a dark winter afternoon. Im in the basement in Meadowlark House in the
Reading Room. Clare has left me some food: roast beef and cheese on whole wheat with
mustard, an apple, a quart of milk, and an entire plastic tub of Christmas cookies, snowballs,
cinnamon-nut diamonds, and peanut cookies with Hersheys Kisses stuck into them. I am
wearing my favorite jeans and a Sex Pistols T-shirt. I ought to be a happy camper, but Im
not: Clare has also left me todays South Haven Daily; its dated December 24, 1988.
Christmas Eve. This evening, in the Get Me High Lounge, in Chicago, my twenty-five-yearold
self will drink until I quietly slide off the bar stool and onto the floor and end up having
my stomach pumped at Mercy Hospital. Its the nineteenth anniversary of my mothers
death.
I sit quietly and think about my mom. Its funny how memory erodes. If all I had to work
from were my childhood memories, my knowledge of my mother would be faded and soft,
with a few sharp moments standing out. When I was five I heard her sing Lulu at the Lyric
Opera. I remember Dad, sitting next to me, smiling up at Mom at the end of the first act with
utter exhilaration. I remember sitting with Mom at Orchestra Hall, watching Dad play
Beethoven under Boulez. I remember being allowed to come into the living room during a
party my parents were giving and reciting Blakes Tyger, Tyger burning bright to the guests,
complete with growling noises; I was four, and when I was done my mother swept me up and
kissed me and everyone applauded. She was wearing dark lipstick and I insisted on going to
bed with her lip prints on my cheek. I remember her sitting on a bench in Warren Park while
my dad pushed me on a swing, and she bobbed close and far, close and far.
One of the best and most painful things about time traveling has been the opportunity to
see my mother alive. I have even spoken to her a few times; little things like Lousy weather
today, isnt it? I give her my seat on the El, follow her in the supermarket, watch her sing. I
hang around outside the apartment my father still lives in, and watch the two of them,
sometimes with my infant self, take walks, eat in restaurants, go to the movies. Its the 60s,
and they are elegant, young, brilliant musicians with all the world before them. They are
happy as larks, they shine with their luck, their joy. When we run across each other they
wave; they think I am someone who lives in the neighborhood, someone who takes a lot of
walks, someone who gets his hair cut oddly and seems to mysteriously ebb and flow in age. I
once heard my father wonder if I was a cancer patient. It still amazes me that Dad has never
realized that this man lurking around the early years of their marriage was his son.
I see how my mother is with me. Now she is pregnant, now they bring me home from the
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
82
hospital, now she takes me to the park in a baby carriage and sits memorizing scores, singing
softly with small hand gestures to me, making faces and shaking toys at me. Now we walk
hand in hand and admire the squirrels, the cars, the pigeons, anything that moves. She wears
cloth coats and loafers with Capri pants. She is dark-haired with a dramatic face, a full
mouth, wide eyes, short hair; she looks Italian but actually shes Jewish. My mom wears
lipstick, eye liner, mascara, blush, and eyebrow pencil to go to the dry cleaners. Dad is
much as he always is, tall, spare, a quiet dresser, a wearer of hats. The difference is his face.
He is deeply content. They touch each other often, hold hands, walk in unison. At the beach
the three of us wear matching sunglasses and I have a ridiculous blue hat. We all lie in the
sun slathered in baby oil. We drink Rum and Coke, and Hawaiian Punch.
My mothers star is rising. She studies with Jehan Meek, with Mary Delacroix, and they
carefully guide her along the paths of fame; she sings a number of small but gemlike roles,
attracting the ears of Louis Behaire at the Lyric. She understudies Linea Waverleighs Aida.
Then she is chosen to sing Carmen. Other companies take notice, and soon we are traveling
around the world. She records Schubert for Decca, Verdi and Weill for EMI, and we go to
London, to Paris, to Berlin, to New York. I remember only an endless series of hotel rooms
and airplanes. Her performance at Lincoln Center is on television; I watch it with Gram and
Gramps in Muncie. I am six years old and I hardly believe that its my mom, there in black
and white on the small screen. She is singing Madama Butterfly.
They make plans to move to Vienna after the end of the Lyrics 69 -70 season. Dad
auditions at the Philharmonic. Whenever the phone rings its Uncle Ish, Moms manager, or
someone from a record label.
I hear the door at the top of the stairs open and clap shut and then slowly descending
footsteps. Clare knocks quietly four times and I remove the straight-backed chair from under
the doorknob. Theres still snow in her hair and her cheeks are red. She is seventeen years
old. Clare throws her arms around me and hugs me excitedly. Merry Christmas, Henry!
she says. Its so great youre here! I kiss her on the cheek; her cheer and bustle have
scattered my thoughts but my sense of sadness and loss remains. I run my hands over her hair
and come away with a small handful of snow that melts immediately.
Whats wrong? Clare takes in the untouched food, my uncheerful demeanor. Youre
sulking because theres no mayo?
Hey. Hush. I sit down on the broken old La-Z-Boy and Clare squeezes in beside me. I
put my arm around her shoulders. She puts her hand on my inner thigh. I remove it, and hold
it. Her hand is cold. Have I ever told you about my mom?
No. Clare is all ears; shes always eager for any bits of autobiography I let drop. As the
dates on the List grow few and our two years of separation loom large, Clare is secretly
convinced she can find me in real time if I would only dole out a few facts. Of course, she
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
83
cant, because I wont, and she doesnt.
We each eat a cookie. Okay. Once upon a time, I had a mom. I had a dad, too, and they
were very deeply in love. And they had me. And we were all pretty happy. And both of them
were really terrific at their jobs, and my mother, especially, was great at what she did, and we
used to travel all over, seeing the hotel rooms of the world. So it was almost Christmas
What year?
The year I was six. It was the morning of Christmas Eve, and my dad was in Vienna
because we were going to move there soon and he was finding us an apartment. So the idea
was that Dad would fly into the airport and Mom and I would drive out and pick him up and
we would all continue on to Grandmas house for the holidays.
It was a gray, snowy morning and the streets were covered in sheets of ice that hadnt
been salted yet. Mom was a nervous driver. She hated expressways, hated driving to the
airport, and had only agreed to do this because it made a lot of sense. We got up early, and
she packed the car. I was wearing a winter coat, a knit hat, boots, jeans, a pullover sweater,
underwear, wool socks that were kind of tight, and mittens. She was dressed entirely in
black, which was more unusual then than it is now.
Clare drinks some of the milk directly from the carton. She leaves a cinnamon-colored
lipstick print. What kind of car?
It was a white 62 Ford Fairlane.
Whats that?
Look it up. It was built like a tank. It had fins. My parents loved it it had a lot of
history for them.
So we got in the car. I sat in the front passenger seat, we both wore our seatbelts. And we
drove. The weather was absolutely awful. It was hard to see, and the defrost in that car
wasnt the greatest. We went through this maze of residential streets, and then we got on the
expressway. It was after rush hour, but traffic was a mess because of the weather and the
holiday So we were moving maybe fifteen, twenty miles an hour. My mother stayed in the
right-hand lane, probably because she didnt want to change lanes without being able to see
very well and because we werent going to be on the expressway very long before we exited
for the airport.
We were behind a truck, well behind it, giving it plenty of room up there. As we passed
an entrance a small car, a red Corvette, actually, got on behind us. The Corvette, which was
being driven by a dentist who was only slightly inebriated, at 10:30 a.m., got on just a bit too
quickly, and was unable to slow down soon enough because of the ice on the road, and hit
our car. And in ordinary weather conditions, the Corvette would have been mangled and the
indestructible Ford Fairlane would have had a bent fender and it wouldnt have been that big
of a deal.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
84
But the weather was bad, the roads were slick, so the shove from the Corvette sent our
car accelerating forward just as traffic slowed down. The truck ahead of us was barely
moving. My mother was pumping the brakes but nothing was happening.
We hit the truck practically in slow motion, or so it seemed to me. In actuality we were
going about forty. The truck was an open pickup truck full of scrap metal. When we hit it, a
large sheet of steel flew off the back of the truck, came through our windshield, and
decapitated my mother.
Clare has her eyes closed. No.
Its true.
But you were right thereyou were too short!
No, that wasnt it, the steel embedded in my seat right where my forehead should have
been. I have a scar where it started to cut my forehead. I show Clare. It got my hat. The
police couldnt figure it out. All my clothes were in the car, on the seat and the floor, and I
was found stark naked by the side of the road.
You time traveled.
Yes. I time traveled. We are silent for a moment. It was only the second time it ever
happened to me. I had no idea what was going on. I was watching us plow into this truck,
and then I was in the hospital. In fact, I was pretty much unhurt, just in shock.
How.. .why do you think it happened?
Stresspure fear. I think my body did the only trick it could.
Clare turns her face to mine, sad and excited. So...
So. Mom died, and I didnt. The front end of the Ford crumpled up, the steering column
went through Moms chest, her head went through the now empty windshield and into the
back of the truck, there was an unbelievable amount of blood. The guy in the Corvette was
unscathed. The truck driver got out of his truck to see what hit him, saw Mom, fainted on the
road and was run over by a school bus driver who didnt see him and was gawking at the
accident. The truck driver had two broken legs. Meanwhile, I was completely absent from
the scene for ten minutes and forty-seven seconds. I dont remember where I went; maybe it
was only a second or two for me. Traffic came to a complete halt. Ambulances were trying to
come from three different directions and couldnt get near us for half an hour. Paramedics
came running on foot. I appeared on the shoulder. The only person who saw me appear was a
little girl; she was in the back seat of a green Chevrolet station wagon. Her mouth opened,
and she just stared and stared.
ButHenry, you wereyou said you dont remember. And how could you know this
anyway? Ten minutes and forty-seven seconds? Exactly?
I am quiet for a while, searching for the best way to explain. You know about gravity,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
85
right? The larger something is, the more mass it has, the more gravitational pull it exerts? It
pulls smaller things to it, and they orbit around and around?
Yes....
My mother dying...its the pivotal thing...everything else goes around and around it...I
dream about it, and I alsotime travel to it. Over and over. If you could be there, and could
hover over the scene of the accident, and you could see every detail of it, all the people, cars,
trees, snowdriftsif you had enough time to really look at everything, you would see me. I
am in cars, behind bushes, on the bridge, in a tree. I have seen it from every angle, I am even
a participant in the aftermath: I called the airport from a nearby gas station to page my father
with the message to come immediately to the hospital. I sat in the hospital waiting room and
watched my father walk through on his way to find me. He looks gray and ravaged. I walked
along the shoulder of the road, waiting for my young self to appear, and I put a blanket
around my thin childs shoulders. I looked into my small uncomprehending face, and I
thought...I thought....I am weeping now. Clare wraps her arms around me and I cry
soundlessly into her mohair-sweatered breasts.
What? What, Henry?
I thought, I should have died, too!
We hold each other. I gradually get hold of myself. I have made a mess of Clares
sweater. She goes to the laundry room and comes back wearing one of Alicias white
polyester chamber music playing shirts. Alicia is only fourteen, but shes already taller and
bigger than Clare. I stare at Clare, standing before me, and I am sorry to be here, sorry to ruin
her Christmas.
Im sorry, Clare. I didnt mean to put all this sadness on you. I just find Christmas..
.difficult.
Oh, Henry! Im so glad youre here, and, you know, Id rather knowI mean, you just
come out of nowhere, and disappear, and if I know things, about your life, you seem
more...real. Even terrible things.. .I need to know as much as you can say. Alicia is calling
down the stairs for Clare. It is time for Clare to join her family, to celebrate Christmas. I
stand, and we kiss, cautiously, and Clare says Coming! and gives me a smile and then
shes running up the stairs. I prop the chair under the door again and settle in for a long night.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
86
CHRISTMAS EVE, TWO
Saturday, December 24, 1988 (Henry is 25)
HENRY: I call Dad and ask if he wants me to come over for dinner after the Christmas
matinee concert. He makes a half-hearted attempt at inviting me but I back out, to his relief.
The Official DeTamble Day of Mourning will be conducted in multiple locations this year.
Mrs. Kim has gone to Korea to visit her sisters; Ive been watering her plants and taking in
her mail. I call Ingrid Carmichel and ask her to come out with me and she reminds me,
crisply, that its Christmas Eve and some people have families to kowtow to. I run through
my address book. Everyone is out of town, or in town with their visiting relatives. I should
have gone to see Gram and Gramps. Then I remember theyre in Florida. Its 2:53 in the
afternoon and stores are closing down. I buy a bottle of schnapps at Als and stow it in my
overcoat pocket. Then I hop on the El at Belmont and ride downtown. Its a gray day, and
cold. The train is half full, mostly people with their kids going down to see Marshall Fields
Christmas windows and do last minute shopping at Water Tower Place. I get off at Randolph
and Walk east to Grant Park. I stand on the IC overpass for a while, drinking, and then I walk
down to the skating rink. A few couples and little kids are skating. The kids chase each other
and skate backward and do figure eights. I rent a pair of more-or-less my size skates, lace
them on, and walk onto the ice. I skate the perimeter of the rink, smoothly and without
thinking too much. Repetition, movement, balance, cold air. Its nice. The sun is setting. I
skate for an hour or so, then return the skates, pull on my boots, and walk.
I walk west on Randolph, and south on Michigan Avenue, past the Art Institute. The lions
are decked out in Christmas wreathes. I walk down Columbus Drive. Grant Park is empty,
except for the crows, which strut and circle over the evening-blue snow. The streetlights tint
the sky orange above me; its a deep cerulean blue over the lake. At Buckingham Fountain I
stand until the cold becomes unbearable watching seagulls wheeling and diving, fighting
over a loaf of bread somebody has left for them. A mounted policeman rides slowly around
the fountain once and then sedately continues south.
I walk. My boots are not quite waterproof, and despite my several sweaters my overcoat is
a bit thin for the dropping temperature. Not enough body fat; Im always cold from
November to April. I walk along Harrison, over to State Street. I pass the Pacific Garden
Mission, where the homeless have gathered for shelter and dinner. I wonder what theyre
having; I wonder if theres any festivity, there, in the shelter. There are few cars. I dont have
a watch, but I guess that its about seven. Ive noticed lately that my sense of time passing is
different; it seems to run slower than other peoples. An afternoon can be like a day to me; an
El ride can be an epic journey. Today is interminable. I have managed to get through most of
the day without thinking, too much, about Mom, about the accident, about all of it...but now,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
87
in the evening, walking, it is catching up with me. I realize Im hungry. The alcohol has worn
off. Im almost at Adams, and I mentally review the amount of cash I have on me and decide
to splurge on dinner at the Berghoff a venerable German restaurant famous for its brewery.
The Berghoff is warm, and noisy. There are quite a few people, eating and standing
around. The legendary Berghoff waiters are bustling importantly from kitchen to table. I
stand in line, thawing out, amidst chattering families and couples. Eventually I am led to a
small table in the main dining room, toward the back. I order a dark beer and a plate of duck
wursts with spaetzle. When the food comes, I eat slowly. I polish off all the bread, too, and
realize that I cant remember eating lunch. This is good, Im taking care of myself, Im not
being an idiot, Im remembering to eat dinner. I lean back in my chair and survey the room.
Under the high ceilings, dark paneling, and murals of boats, middle-aged couples eat their
dinners. They have spent the afternoon shopping, or at the symphony, and they talk
pleasantly of the presents they have bought, their grandchildren, plane tickets and arrival
times, Mozart. I have an urge to go to the symphony, now, but theres no evening program.
Dad is probably on his way home from Orchestra Hall. I would sit in the upper reaches of the
uppermost balcony (the best place to sit, acoustically) and listen to Das Lied von der Erde, or
Beethoven, or something similarly un-Christmasy. Oh well. Maybe next year. I have a
sudden glimpse of all the Christmases of my life lined up one after another, waiting to be
gotten through, and despair floods me. No. I wish for a moment that Time would lift me out
of this day, and into some more benign one. But then I feel guilty for wanting to avoid the
sadness; dead people need us to remember them, even if it eats us, even if all we can do is
say Im sorry until it is as meaningless as air. I dont want to burden this warm festive
restaurant with grief that I would have to recall the next time Im here with Gram and
Gramps, so I pay and leave.
Back on the street, I stand pondering. I dont want to go home. I want to be with people, I
want to be distracted. I suddenly think of the Get Me High Lounge, a place where anything
can happen, a haven for eccentricity. Perfect. I walk over to Water Tower Place and catch the
#66 Chicago Avenue bus, get off at Damen, and take the #50 bus north. The bus smells of
vomit, and Im the only passenger. The driver is singing Silent Night in a smooth church
tenor, and I wish him a Merry Christmas as I step off the bus at Wabansia. As I walk past the
Fix-It shop snow begins to fall, and I catch the big wet flakes on the tips of my fingers. I can
hear music leaking out of the bar. The abandoned ghost train track looms over the street in
the sodium vapor glare and as I open the door someone starts to blow a trumpet and hot jazz
smacks me in the chest. I walk into it like a drowning man, which is what I have come here
to be.
There are about ten people in the place, counting Mia, the bartender. Three musicians,
trumpet, standing bass, and clarinet, occupy the tiny stage, and the customers are all sitting at
the bar. The musicians are playing furiously, swinging at maximum volume like sonic
dervishes and as I sit and listen I make out the melody line of White Christmas. Mia comes
over and stares at me and I shout Whiskey and water! at the top of my voice and she bawls
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
88
House? and I yell Okay! and she turns to mix it. There is an abrupt halt to the music. The
phone rings, and Mia snatches it up and says, Get Me Hiiiiiiiiigh! She sets my drink in
front of me and I lay a twenty on the bar. No, she says into the phone. Well, daaaang.
Well, fuck you, too. She whomps the receiver back into its cradle like shes dunking a
basketball. Mia stands looking pissed off for a few moments, then lights a Pall Mall and
blows a huge cloud of smoke at me. Oh, sorry. The musicians troop over to the bar and she
serves them beers. The rest-room door is on the stage, so I take advantage of the break
between sets to take a leak. When I get back to the bar Mia has set another drink in front of
my bar stool. Youre psychic, I say.
Youre easy. She plunks her ashtray down and leans against the inside of the bar,
pondering. What are you doing, later?
I review my options. Ive been known to go home with Mia a time or two, and shes good
fun and all that, but Im really not in the mood for casual frivolity at the moment. On the
other hand, a warm body is not a bad thing when youre down. Im planning to get
extremely drunk. What did you have in mind?
Well, if youre not too drunk you could come over, and if youre not dead when you
wake up you could do me a huge favor and come to Christmas dinner at my parents place in
Glencoe and answer to the name Rafe.
Oh, God, Mia. Im suicidal just thinking about it. Sorry.
She leans over the bar and speaks emphatically. Cmon, Henry. Help me out. Youre a
presentable young person of the male gender. Hell, youre a librarian. You wont freak when
my parents start asking who your parents are and what college you went to.
Actually, I will. I will run straight to the powder room and slit my throat. Anyway,
whats the point? Even if they love me it just means theyll torture you for years with What
ever happened to that nice young librarian you were dating? And what happens when they
meet the real Rafe?
I dont think Ill have to worry about that. Cmon. Ill perform Triple X sex acts on you
that youve never even heard of.
I have been refusing to meet Ingrids parents for months. I have refused to go to
Christmas dinner at their house tomorrow. Theres no way Im going to do this for Mia,
whom I hardly know. Mia. Any other night of the yearlook, my goal tonight is to achieve
a level of inebriation at which I can barely stand up, much less get it up. Just call your
parents and tell them Rafe is having a tonsillectomy or something.
She goes to the other end of the bar to take care of three suspiciously young male college
types. Then she messes around with bottles for a while, making something elaborate. She
sets the tall glass in front of me. Here. Its on the house. The drink is the color of
strawberry Kool-Aid.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
89
What is it? I take a sip. It tastes like 7-Up.
Mia smiles an evil little smile. Its something I invented. You want to get smashed, this
is the express train.
Oh. Well, thank you. I toast her, and drink up. A sensation of heat and total well-being
floods me. Heavens. Mia, you ought to patent this. You could have little lemonade stands
all over Chicago and sell it in Dixie cups. Youd be a millionaire.
Another?
Sure.
As a promising junior partner in DeTamble & DeTamble, Alcoholics at Large, I have not
yet found the outer limit in my ability to consume liquor. A few drinks later, Mia is peering
at me across the bar with concern.
Henry?
Yeah?
Im cutting you off. This is probably a good idea. I try to nod my agreement with Mia,
but its too much effort. Instead, I slide slowly, almost gracefully, to the floor.
I wake up much later at Mercy Hospital. Mia is sitting next to my bed. Her mascara has
run all over her face. Im hooked up to an IV and I feel bad. Very bad. In fact, every kind of
bad. I turn my head and retch into a basin. Mia reaches over and wipes my mouth.
Henry Mia is whispering.
Hey. What the hell.
Henry, Im so sorry
Not your fault. What happened?
You passed out and I did the mathhow much do you weigh?
175.
Jesus. Did you eat dinner?
I think about it. Yeah.
Well, anyway, the stuff you were drinking was about forty proof. And you had two
whiskeys.. .but you seemed perfectly fine and then all of a sudden you looked awful, and
then you passed out, and I thought about it and realized you had a lot of booze in you. So I
called 911 and here you are.
Thanks. I think
Henry, do you have some kind of death wish? I consider. Yes. I turn to the wall, and
pretend to sleep.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
90
Saturday, April 8, 1989 (Clare is 17, Henry is 40)
CLARE: Im sitting in Grandma Meagrams room, doing the New York Times crossword
puzzle with her. Its a bright cool April morning and I can see red tulips whipping in the
wind in the garden. Mama is down there planting something small and white over by the
forsythia. Her hat is almost blowing off and she keeps clapping her hand to her head and
finally takes the hat off and sets her work basket on it.
I havent seen Henry in almost two months; the next date on the List is three weeks away.
We are approaching the time when I wont see him for more than two years. I used to be so
casual about Henry, when I was little; seeing Henry wasnt anything too unusual. But now
every time hes here is one less time hes going to be here. And things are different with us. I
want something...I want Henry to say something, do something that proves this hasnt all
been some kind of elaborate joke. I want. Thats all. I am wanting.
Grandma Meagram is sitting in her blue wing chair by the window. I sit in the window
seat, with the newspaper in my lap. We are about halfway through the crossword. My
attention has drifted.
Read that one again, child, says Grandma.
Twenty down. Monkish monkey. Eight letters, second letter a, last letter n.
 Capuchin. She smiles, her unseeing eyes turn in my direction. To Grandma I am a dark
shadow against a somewhat lighter background. Thats pretty good, eh?
Yeah, thats great. Geez, try this one: nineteen across, Dont stick your elbow out so far.
Ten letters, second letter u.
 Burma Shave. Before your time.
Arrgh. Ill never get this. I stand up and stretch. I desperately need to go for a walk. My
grandmothers room is comforting but claustrophobic. The ceiling is low, the wallpaper is
dainty blue flowers, the bedspread is blue chintz, the carpet is white, and it smells of powder
and dentures and old skin. Grandma Meagram sits trim and straight. Her hair is beautiful,
white but still slightly tinged with the red I have inherited from her, and perfectly coiled and
pinned into a chignon. Grandmas eyes are like blue clouds. She has been blind for nine
years, and she has adapted well; as long as she is in the house she can get around. Shes been
trying to teach me the art of crossword solving, but I have trouble caring enough to see one
through by myself. Grandma used to do them in ink. Henry loves crossword puzzles.
Its a beautiful day, isnt it, says Grandma, leaning back in her chair and rubbing her
knuckles.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
91
I nod, and then say, Yes, but its kind of windy. Mamas down there gardening, and
everything keeps blowing away on her.
How typical of Lucille, says her mother. Do you know, child, Id like to go for a
walk.
I was just thinking that same thing, I say. She smiles, and holds out her hands, and I
gently pull her out of her chair. I fetch our coats, and tie a scarf around Grandmas hair to
stop it from getting messed up by the wind. Then we make our way slowly down the stairs
and out the front door. We stand on the drive, and I turn to Grandma and say, Where do you
want to go?
Lets go to the Orchard, she says.
Thats pretty far. Oh, Mamas waving; wave back. We wave at Mama, who is all the
way down by the fountain now. Peter, our gardener, is with her. He has stopped talking to
her and is looking at us, waiting for us to go on so he and Mama can finish the argument they
are having, probably about daffodils, or peonies. Peter loves to argue with Mama, but she
always gets her way in the end. Its almost a mile to the Orchard, Grandma.
Well, Clare, theres nothing wrong with my legs.
Okay, then, well go to the Orchard. I take her arm, and away we go. When we get to
the edge of the Meadow I say, Shade or sun? and she answers, Oh, sun, to be sure, and
so we take the path that cuts through the middle of the Meadow, that leads to the clearing. As
we walk, I describe.
Were passing the bonfire pile. Theres a bunch of birds in itoh, there they go!
Crows. Starlings. Doves, too, she says.
Yes...were at the gate, now. Watch out, the path is a little muddy. I can see dog tracks, a
pretty big dog, maybe Joey from Allinghams. Everything is greening up pretty good. Here is
that wild rose.
How high is the Meadow? asks Grandma.
Only about a foot. Its a real pale green. Here are the little oaks.
She turns her face toward me, smiling. Lets go and say hello. I lead her to the oaks that
grow just a few feet from the path. My grandfather planted these three oak trees in the forties
as a memorial to my Great Uncle Teddy, Grandmas brother who was killed in the Second
World War. The oak trees still arent very big, only about fifteen feet tall. Grandma puts her
hand on the trunk of the middle one and says, Hello. I dont know if shes addressing the
tree or her brother.
We walk on. As we walk over the rise I see the Meadow laid out before us, and Henry is
standing in the clearing. I halt. What is it? Grandma asks. Nothing, I tell her. I lead her
along the path. What do you see? she asks me. Theres a hawk circling over the woods, I
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
92
say. What time is it?
I look at my watch. Almost noon.
We enter the clearing. Henry stands very still. He smiles at me. He looks tired. His hair is
graying. He is wearing his black overcoat, he stands out dark against the bright Meadow.
Where is the rock? Grandma says. I want to sit down  I guide her to the rock, help her to
sit. She turns her face in Henrys direction and stiffens. Whos there? she asks me, urgency
in her voice. No one  I lie.
Theres a man, there, she says, nodding toward Henry. He looks at me with an
expression that seems to mean Go ahead. Tell her. A dog is barking in the woods. I hesitate.
Clare, Grandma says. She sounds scared.
Introduce us, Henry says, quietly.
Grandma is still, waiting. I put my arm around her shoulders. Its okay, Grandma, I say.
This is my friend Henry. Hes the one I told you about. Henry walks over to us and holds
out his hand. I place Grandmas hand in his. Elizabeth Meagram, I say to Henry.
So youre the one, Grandma says.
Yes, Henry replies, and this Yes falls into my ears like balm. Yes.
May I? She gestures with her hands toward Henry.
Shall I sit next to you? Henry sits on the rock. I guide Grandmas hand to his face. He
watches my face as she touches his. That tickles, Henry says to Grandma.
Sandpaper, she says as she runs her fingertips across his unshaven chin. Youre not a
boy, she says.
No.
How old are you?
Im eight years older than Clare.
She looks puzzled. Twenty-five? I look at Henrys salt and pepper hair, at the creases
around his eyes. He looks about forty, maybe older.
Twenty-five, he says firmly. Somewhere out there, its true.
Clare tells me shes going to marry you, my grandmother says to Henry.
He smiles at me. Yes, were going to get married. In a few years, when Clare is out of
school.
In my day, gentlemen came to dinner and met the family.
Our situation is...unorthodox. That hasnt been possible.
I dont see why not. If youre going to cavort around in meadows with my granddaughter
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
93
you can certainly come up to the house and be inspected by her parents.
Id be delighted to, Henry says, standing up, but Im afraid right now I have a train to
catch.
Just a moment, young man Grandma begins, as Henry says, Goodbye, Mrs.
Meagram. It was great to finally meet you. Clare, Im sorry I cant stay longer I reach out
to Henry but theres the noise like all the sound is being sucked out of the world and hes
already gone. I turn to Grandma. Shes sitting on the rock with her hands stretched out, an
expression of utter bewilderment on her face.
What happened? she asks me, and I begin to explain. When I am finished she sits with
her head bowed, twisting her arthritic fingers into strange shapes. Finally she raises her face
toward me. But Clare, says my grandmother, he must be a demon. She says it matter-offactly,
as though shes telling me that my coats buttoned up wrong, or that its time for
lunch.
What can I say? Ive thought of that, I tell her. I take her hands to stop her from rubbing
them red. But Henry is good. He doesnt feel like a demon.
Grandma smiles. You talk as though youve met a peck of them.
Dont you think a real demon would be sort ofdemonic?
I think he would be nice as pie if he wanted to be.
I choose my words carefully. Henry told me once that his doctor thinks hes a new kind
of human. You know, sort of the next step in evolution,
Grandma shakes her head. That is just as bad as being a demon. Goodness, Clare, why in
the world would you want to marry such a person? Think of the children you would have!
Popping into next week and back before breakfast!
I laugh. But it will be exciting! Like Mary Poppins, or Peter Pan.
She squeezes my hands just a little. Think for a minute, darling: in fairy tales its always
the children who have the fine adventures. The mothers have to stay at home and wait for the
children to fly in the window.
I look at the pile of clothes lying crumpled on the ground where Henry has left them. I
pick them up and fold them. Just a minute, I say, and I find the clothes box and put
Henrys clothes in it. Lets go back to the house. Its past lunchtime. I help her off the
rock. The wind is roaring in the grass, and we bend into it and make our way toward the
house. When we come to the rise I turn and look back over the clearing. Its empty.
A few nights later, I am sitting by Grandmas bed, reading Mrs. Dalloway to her. Its
evening. I look up; Grandma seems to be asleep. I stop reading, and close the book. Her eyes
open.
Hello, I say.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
94
Do you ever miss him? she asks me.
Every day. Every minute.
Every minute, she says. Yes. Its that way, isnt it? She turns on her side and burrows
into the pillow.
Good night, I say, turning out the lamp. As I stand in the dark looking down at
Grandma in her bed, self-pity floods me as though I have been injected with it. Its that way,
isnt it? Isnt it.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
95
EAT OR BE EATEN
Saturday, November 30, 1991 (Henry is 28, Clare is 20)
HENRY: Clare has invited me to dinner at her apartment. Charisse, Clares roommate, and
Gomez, Charisses boyfriend, will also be dining. At 6:59 p.m. Central Standard Time, I
stand in my Sunday best in Clares vestibule with my finger on her buzzer, fragrant yellow
freesia and an Australian Cabernet in my other arm, and my heart in my mouth. I have not
been to Clares before, nor have I met any of her friends. I have no idea what to expect.
The buzzer makes a horrible sound and I open the door. All the way up! hollers a deep
male voice. I plod up four flights of stairs. The person attached to the voice is tall and blond,
sports the worlds most immaculate pompadour and a cigarette and is wearing a Solidarnosc
T-shirt. He seems familiar, but I cant place him. For a person named Gomez he looks
very...Polish. I find out later that his real name is Jan Gomolinski.
Welcome, Library Boy! Gomez booms.
Comrade! I reply, and hand him the flowers and the wine. We eyeball each other,
achieve detente, and with a flourish Gomez ushers me into the apartment.
Its one of those wonderful endless railroad apartments from the twentiesa long hallway
with rooms attached almost as afterthoughts. There are two aesthetics at work here, funky
and Victorian. This plays out in the spectacle of antique petit point chairs with heavy carved
legs next to velvet Elvis paintings. I can hear Duke Ellingtons I Got It Bad and That Aint
Good playing at the end of the hall, and Gomez leads me in that direction.
Clare and Charisse are in the kitchen. My kittens, I have brought you a new toy, Gomez
intones. It answers to the name of Henry, but you can call it Library Boy I meet Clares
eyes. She shrugs her shoulders and holds her face out to be kissed; I oblige with a chaste
peck and turn to shake hands with Charisse, who is short and round in a very pleasing way,
all curves and long black hair. She has such a kind face that I have an urge to confide
something, anything, to her, just to see her reaction. Shes a small Filipino Madonna. In a
sweet, Dont Fuck With Me voice she says, Oh, Gomez, do shut up. Hello, Henry. Im
Charisse Bonavant. Please ignore Gomez, I just keep him around to lift heavy objects.
And sex. Dont forget the sex, Gomez reminds her. He looks at me. Beer?
Sure. He delves into the fridge and hands me a Blatz. I pry off the cap and take a long
pull. The kitchen looks as though a Pillsbury dough factory has exploded in it. Clare sees the
direction of my gaze. I suddenly recollect that she doesnt know how to cook.
Its a work in progress, says Clare.
Its an installation piece, says Charisse.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
96
Are we going to eat it? asks Gomez.
I look from one to the other, and we all burst out laughing. Do any of you know how to
cook?
No.
Gomez can make rice.
Only Rice-A-Roni.
Clare knows how to order pizza.
And ThaiI can order Thai, too.
Charisse knows how to eat.
 Shut up, Gomez, say Charisse and Clare in unison.
Well, uh.. .what was that going to be? I inquire, nodding at the disaster on the counter.
Clare hands me a magazine clipping. Its a recipe for Chicken and Shiitake Risotto with
Winter Squash and Pine Nut Dressing. Its from Gourmand, and there are about twenty
ingredients. Do you have all this stuff?
Clare nods. The shopping part I can do. Its the assembly that perplexes.
I examine the chaos more closely. I could make something out of this.
You can cook? I nod.
It cooks! Dinner is saved! Have another beer! Gomez exclaims. Charisse looks relieved,
and smiles warmly at me. Clare, who has been hanging back almost fearfully, sidles over to
me and whispers, Youre not mad? I kiss her, just a tad longer than is really polite in front
of other people. I straighten up, take off my jacket, and roll up my sleeves. Give me an
apron, I demand. You, Gomezopen that wine. Clare, clean up all that spilled stuff, its
turning to cement. Charisse, would you set the table?
One hour and forty-three minutes later we are sitting around the dining room table eating
Chicken Risotto Stew with Pureed Squash. Everything has lots of butter in it. We are all
drunk as skunks.
CLARE: The whole time Henry is making dinner Gomez is standing around the kitchen
making jokes and smoking and drinking beer and whenever no one is looking he makes
awful faces at me. Finally Charisse catches him and draws her finger across her throat and he
stops. We are talking about the most banal stuff: our jobs, and school, and where we grew
up, and all the usual things that people talk about when they meet each other for the first
time. Gomez tells Henry about his job being a lawyer, representing abused and neglected
children who are wards of the state. Charisse regales us with tales of her exploits at Lusus
Naturae, a tiny software company that is trying to make computers understand when people
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
97
talk to them, and her art, which is making pictures that you look at on a computer. Henry
tells stories about the Newberry Library and the odd people who come to study the books.
Does the Newberry really have a book made out of human skin? Charisse asks Henry.
Yep. The Chronicles of Nawat Wuzeer Hydembed. It was found in the palace of the King
of Delhi in 1857. Come by some time and Ill pull it out for you.
Charisse shudders and grins. Henry is stirring the stew. When he says Chow time, we
all flock to the table. All this time Gomez and Henry have been drinking beer and Charisse
and I have been sipping wine and Gomez has been topping up our glasses and we have not
been eating much but I do not realize how drunk we all are until I almost miss sitting down
on the chair Henry holds for me and Gomez almost sets his own hair on fire while lighting
the candles.
Gomez holds up his glass. The Revolution!
Charisse and I raise our glasses, and Henry does, too. The Revolution! We begin eating,
with enthusiasm. The risotto is slippery and mild, the squash is sweet, the chicken is
swimming in butter. It makes me want to cry, its so good.
Henry takes a bite, then points his fork at Gomez. Which revolution?
Pardon?
Which revolution are we toasting? Charisse and I look at each other in alarm, but it is
too late.
Gomez smiles and my heart sinks. The next one.
The one where the proletariat rises up and the rich get eaten and capitalism is vanquished
in favor of a classless society?
That very one.
Henry winks at me. That seems rather hard on Clare. And what are you planning to do
with the intelligentsia?
Oh, Gomez says, we will probably eat them, too. But well keep you around, as a
cook. This is outstanding grub.
Charisse touches Henrys arm, confidentially. We arent really going to eat anybody,
she says. We are just going to redistribute their assets.
Thats a relief, Henry replies. I wasnt looking forward to cooking Clare.
Gomez says, Its a shame, though. Im sure Clare would be very tasty.
I wonder what cannibal cuisine is like? I say. Is there a cannibal cookbook?
 The Cooked and The Raw, says Charisse.
Henry objects. Thats not really a how-to. I dont think Levi-Strauss gives any recipes.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
98
We could just adapt a recipe, says Gomez, taking another helping of the chicken. You
know, Clare with Porcini Mushrooms and Marinara Sauce over Linguini. Or Breast of Clare
a la Orange. Or
Hey, I say. What if I dont want to be eaten?
Sorry, Clare, Gomez says gravely. Im afraid you have to be eaten for the greater
good.
Henry catches my eye, and smiles. Dont worry, Clare; come the Revolution Ill hide
you at the Newberry. You can live in the stacks and Ill feed you Snickers and Doritos from
the Staff Lunchroom. Theyll never find you.
I shake my head. What about First, we kill all the lawyers?
No, Gomez says. You cant do anything without lawyers. The Revolution would get
all balled up in ten minutes if lawyers werent there to keep it in line.
But my dads a lawyer, I tell him, so you cant eat us after all.
Hes the wrong kind of lawyer Gomez says. He does estates for rich people. I, on the
other hand, represent the poor oppressed children
Oh, shut up, Gomez, says Charisse. Youre hurting Clares feelings.
Im not! Clare wants to be eaten for the Revolution, dont you, Clare?
No.
Oh.
What about the Categorical Imperative? asks Henry.
Say what?
You know, the Golden Rule. Dont eat other people unless you are willing to be eaten.
Gomez is cleaning his nails with the tines of his fork. Dont you think its really Eat or
Be Eaten that makes the world go round?
Yeah, mostly. But arent you yourself a case in point for altruism? Henry asks.
Sure, but I am widely considered to be a dangerous nutcase. Gomez says this with
feigned indifference, but I can see that he is puzzled by Henry. Clare, he says, what about
dessert?
Ohmigod, I almost forgot, I say, standing up too fast and grabbing the table for support.
Ill get it.
Ill help you says Gomez, following me into the kitchen. Im wearing heels and as I
walk into the kitchen I catch the door sill and stagger forward and Gomez grabs me. For a
moment we stand pressed together and I feel his hands on my waist, but he lets me go.
Youre drunk, Clare, Gomez tells me.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
99
I know. So are you. I press the button on the coffee maker and coffee begins to drip into
the pot. I lean against the counter and carefully take the cellophane off the plate of brownies.
Gomez is standing close behind me, and he says very quietly, leaning so that his breath
tickles my ear, Hes the same guy.
What do you mean?
That guy I warned you about. Henry, hes the guy
Charisse walks into the kitchen and Gomez jumps away from me and opens the fridge.
Hey, she says. Can I help?
Here, take the coffee cups... We all juggle cups and saucers and plates and brownies
and make it safely back to the table. Henry is waiting as though hes at the dentist, with a
look of patient dread. I laugh, its so exactly the look he used to have when I brought him
food in the Meadow...but he doesnt remember, he hasnt been there yet. Relax, I say. Its
only brownies. Even I can do brownies. Everyone laughs and sits down. The brownies turn
out to be kind of undercooked. Brownies tartare, says Charisse. Salmonella fudge, says
Gomez. Henry says, Ive always liked dough, and licks his fingers. Gomez rolls a
cigarette, lights it, and takes a deep drag.
HENRY: Gomez lights a cigarette and leans back in his chair. Theres something about this
guy that bugs me. Maybe its the casual possessiveness toward Clare, or the garden variety
Marxism? Im sure Ive seen him before. Past or future? Lets find out. You look very
familiar, I say to him.
Mmm? Yeah, I think weve seen each other around.
Ive got it. Iggy Pop at the Riviera Theater?
He looks startled. Yeah. You were with that blond girl, Ingrid Carmichel, I always used
to see you with. Gomez and I both look at Clare. She is staring intently at Gomez, and he
smiles at her. She looks away, but not at me.
Charisse comes to the rescue. You saw Iggy without me?
Gomez says, You were out of town.
Charisse pouts. I miss everything, she says to me. I missed Patti Smith and now shes
retired. I missed Talking Heads the last time they toured.
Patti Smith will tour again I say.
She will? How do you know? asks Charisse. Clare and I exchange glances.
Im just guessing I tell her. We begin exploring each others musical tastes and discover
that we are all devoted to punk. Gomez tells us about seeing the New York Dolls in Florida
just before Johnny Thunders left the band. I describe a Lene Lovich concert I managed to
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
100
catch on one of my time travels. Charisse and Clare are excited because the Violent Femmes
are playing the Aragon Ballroom in a few weeks and Charisse has scored free tickets. The
evening winds down without further ado. Clare walks me downstairs. We stand in the foyer
between the outer door and the inner door.
Im sorry, she says.
Oh, not at all. It was fun, I didnt mind cooking.
No, Clare says, looking at her shoes, about Gomez.
Its cold in the foyer. I wrap my arms around Clare and she leans against me. What about
Gomez? I ask her. Somethings on her mind. But then she shrugs. Itll be okay, she says,
and I take her word for it. We kiss. I open the outer door, and Clare opens the inner door; I
walk down the sidewalk and look back. Clare is still standing there in the half-open doorway
watching me. I stand, wanting to go back and hold her, wanting to go back upstairs with her.
She turns and begins to walk upstairs, and I watch until she is out of sight.
Saturday, December 14, 1991 Tuesday, May 9, 2000 (Henry is 36)
HENRY: Im stomping the living shit out of a large drunk suburban guy who had the
effrontery to call me a faggot and then tried to beat me up to prove his point. We are in the
alley next to the Vic Theater. I can hear the Smoking Popes bass leaking out of the theaters
side exits as I systematically smash this idiots nose and go to work on his ribs. Im having a
rotten evening, and this fool is taking the brunt of my frustration.
Hey, Library Boy. I turn from my groaning homophobic yuppie to find Gomez leaning
against a dumpster, looking grim.
Comrade. I step back from the guy Ive been bashing, who slides gratefully to the
pavement, doubled up. How goes it? Im very relieved to see Gomez: delighted, actually.
But he doesnt seem to share my pleasure.
Gee, ah, I dont want to disturb you or anything, but thats a friend of mine youre
dismembering, there.
Oh, surely not. Well, he requested it. Just walked right up to me and said, Sir, I urgently
need to be firmly macerated.
Oh. Well, hey, well done. Fucking artistic, actually.
Thank you.
Do you mind if I just scoop up ol Nick here and take him to the hospital?
Be my guest. Damn. I was planning to appropriate Nicks clothing, especially his shoes,
brand new Doc Martens, deep red, barely worn. Gomez.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
101
Yeah? He stoops to lift his friend, who spits a tooth into his own lap.
Whats the date?
December 14.
What year?
He looks up at me like a man who has better things to do than humor lunatics and lifts
Nick in a firemans carry that must be excruciating. Nick begins to whimper. 1991. You
must be drunker than you look. He walks up the alley and disappears in the direction of the
theater entrance. I calculate rapidly. Today is not that long after Clare and I started dating,
therefore Gomez and I hardly know each other. No wonder he was giving me the hairy
eyeball.
He reappears unencumbered. I made Trent deal with it. Nicks his brother. He wasnt
best pleased. We start walking east, down the alley. Forgive me for asking, dear Library
Boy, but why on earth are you dressed like that?
Im wearing blue jeans, a baby blue sweater with little yellow ducks all over it, and a neon
red down vest with pink tennis shoes. Really, its not surprising that someone would feel
they needed to hit me.
It was the best I could do at the time. I hope the guy I took these off of was close to
home. Its about twenty degrees out here. Why are you consorting with frat boys?
Oh, we went to law school together. We are walking by the back door of the ArmyNavy
surplus store and I experience a deep desire to be wearing normal clothing. I decide to
risk appalling Gomez; I know hell get over it. I stop. Comrade. This will only take a
moment; I just need to take care of something. Could you wait at the end of the alley?
What are you doing?
Nothing. Breaking and entering. Pay no attention to the man behind the curtain.
Mind if I come along?
Yes. He looks crestfallen. All right. If you must. I step into the niche which shelters
the back door. This is the third time Ive broken into this place, although the other two
occasions are both in the future at the moment. Ive got it down to a science. First I open the
insignificant combination lock that secures the security grate, slide the grate back, pick the
Yale lock with the inside of an old pen and a safety pin found earlier on Belmont Avenue,
and use a piece of aluminum between the double doors to lift the inside bolt. Voila!
Altogether, it takes about three minutes. Gomez regards me with almost religious awe.
 Where did you learn to do that?
Its a knack, I reply modestly. We step inside. There is a panel of blinking red lights
trying to look like a burglar alarm system, but I know better. Its very dark in here. I mentally
review the layout and the merchandise. Dont touch anything, Gomez. I want to be warm,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
102
and inconspicuous. I step carefully through the aisles, and my eyes adjust to the dark. I start
with pants: black Levis. I select a dark blue flannel shirt, a heavy black wool overcoat with
an industrial-strength lining, wool socks, boxers, heavy mountain-climb ing gloves, and a hat
with ear flaps. In the shoe department I find, to my great satisfaction, Docs exactly like the
ones my buddy Nick was wearing. I am ready for action.
Gomez, meanwhile, is poking around behind the counter. Dont bother, I tell him. This
place doesnt leave cash in the register at night. Lets go. We leave the way we came. I
close the door gently and pull the grate across. I have my previous set of clothing in a
shopping bag. Later I will try to find a Salvation Army collection bin. Gomez looks at me
expectantly, like a large dog whos waiting to see if I have any more lunch meat.
Which reminds me. Im ravenous. Lets go to Ann Sathers.
Ann Sathers? I was expecting you to propose bank robbery, or manslaughter, at the very
least. Youre on a roll, man, dont stop now!
I must pause in my labors to refuel. Come on. We cross from the alley to Ann Sathers
Swedish Restaurants parking lot. The attendant mutely regards us as we traverse his
kingdom. We cut over to Belmont. Its only nine oclock, and the street is teeming with its
usual mix of runaways, homeless mental cases, clubbers, and suburban thrill seekers. Ann
Sathers stands out as an island of normalcy amid the tattoo parlors and condom boutiques.
We enter, and wait by the bakery to be seated. My stomach gurgles. The Swedish decor is
comforting, all wood paneling and swirling red marbling. We are seated in the smoking
section, right in front of the fireplace. Things are looking up. We remove our coats, settle in,
read the menus, even though, as lifelong Chicagoans, we could probably sing them from
memory in two-part harmony. Gomez lays all his smoking paraphernalia next to his
silverware.
Do you mind?
Yes. But go ahead. The price of Gomezs company is marinating in the constant stream
of cigarette smoke that flows from his nostrils. His fingers are a deep ochre color; they flutter
delicately over the thin papers as he rolls Drum tobacco into a thick cylinder, licks the paper,
twists it, sticks it between his lips, and lights it. Ahh. For Gomez, a half hour without a
smoke is an anomaly. I always enjoy watching people satisfy their appetites, even if I dont
happen to share them.
You dont smoke? Anything?
I run.
Oh. Yeah, shit, youre in great shape. I thought you had about killed Nick, and you
werent even winded.
He was too drunk to fight. Just a big sodden punching bag.
Whyd you lay into him like that?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
103
It was just stupidity. The waiter arrives, tells us his name is Lance and the specials are
salmon and creamed peas. He takes our drink orders and speeds away. I toy with the cream
dispenser. He saw how I was dressed, concluded that I was easy meat, got obnoxious,
wanted to beat me up, wouldnt take no for an answer, and got a surprise. I was minding my
own business, really I was.
Gomez looks thoughtful. Which is what, exactly?
Pardon?
Henry. I may look like a chump, but in fact your old Uncle Gomez is not completely
sans clues. I have been paying attention to you for some time: before our little Clare brought
you home, as a matter of fact. I mean, I dont know if you are aware of it, but you are
moderately notorious in certain circles. I know a lot of people who know you. People; well,
women. Women who know you  He squints at me through the haze of his smoke. They say
some pretty strange things. Lance arrives with my coffee and Gomezs milk. We order: a
cheeseburger and fries for Gomez, split pea soup, the salmon, sweet potatoes, and mixed fruit
for me. I feel like Im going to keel over right this minute if I dont get a lot of calories fast.
Lance departs swiftly. Im having trouble caring very much about the misdeeds of my earlier
self, much less justifying them to Gomez. None of his business, anyway. But hes waiting for
my answer. I stir cream into my coffee, watching the slight white scum on the top dissipate
in swirls. I throw caution to the winds. It doesnt matter, after all.
What would you like to know, comrade?
Everything. I want to know why a seemingly mild-mannered librarian beats a guy into a
coma over nothing while wearing kindergarten-teacher clothing. I want to know why Ingrid
Carmichel tried to kill herself eight days ago. I want to know why you look ten years older
right now than you did the last time I saw you. Your hairs going gray. I want to know why
you can pick a Yale lock. I want to know why Clare had a photograph of you before she
actually met you.
Clare had a photo of me before 1991 ? I didnt know that. Oops. What did the photo look
like?
Gomez regards me. More like you look at the moment, not like you looked a couple
weeks ago when you came over for dinner. That was two weeks ago? Lord, this is only the
second time Gomez and I have met. It was taken outdoors. Youre smiling. The date on the
back is June, 1988. The food arrives, and we pause to arrange it on our little table. I start
eating as though theres no tomorrow.
Gomez sits, watching me eating, his food untouched. Ive seen Gomez do his thing in
court with hostile witnesses, just like this. He simply wills them to spill the beans. I dont
mind telling all, I just want to eat first. In fact, I need Gomez to know the truth, because hes
going to save my ass repeatedly in the years to come.
Im halfway through the salmon and hes still sitting. Eat, eat, I say in my best imitation
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
104
of Mrs. Kim. He dips a fry in ketchup and munches it. Dont worry, Ill confess. Just let me
have my last meal in peace. He capitulates, and starts to eat his burger. Neither of us says a
word until Ive finished consuming my fruit. Lance brings me more coffee. I doctor it, stir it.
Gomez is looking at me as though he wants to shake me. I resolve to amuse myself at his
expense.
Okay. Here it is: time travel.
Gomez rolls his eyes and grimaces, but says nothing.
I am a time traveler. At the moment I am thirty-six years old. This afternoon was May 9,
2000. It was a Tuesday. I was at work, I had just finished a Show and Tell for a bunch of
Caxton Club members and I had gone back to the stacks to reshelve the books when I
suddenly found myself on School Street, in 1991.1 had the usual problem of getting
something to wear. I hid under somebodys porch for a while. I was cold, and nobody was
coming along, and finally this young guy, dressedwell, you saw how I was dressed. I
mugged him, took his cash and everything he was wearing except his underwear. Scared him
silly; I think he thought I was going to rape him or something. Anyway, I had clothes. Okay.
But in this neighborhood you cant dress like that without having certain misunderstandings
arise. So Ive been taking shit all evening from various people, and your friend just happened
to be the last straw. Im sorry if hes very damaged. I very much wanted his clothes,
especially his shoes. Gomez glances under the table at my feet. I find myself in situations
like that all the time. No pun intended. Theres something wrong with me. I get dislocated in
time, for no reason. I cant control it, I never know when its going to happen, or where and
when Ill end up. So in order to cope, I pick locks, shoplift, pick pockets, mug people,
panhandle, break and enter, steal cars, lie, fold, spindle, and mutilate. You name it, Ive done
it.
Murder.
Well, not that I know of. Ive never raped anybody, either. I look at him as I speak.
Hes poker-faced. Ingrid. Do you actually know Ingrid?
I know Celia Attley.
Dear me. You do keep strange company. How did Ingrid try to kill herself?
An overdose of Valium.
1991? Yeah, okay. That would be Ingrids fourth suicide attempt.
What?
Ah, you didnt know that? Celia is only selectively informative. Ingrid actually
succeeded in doing herself in on January 2, 1994. She shot herself in the chest.
Henry
You know, it happened six years ago, and Im still angry at her. What a waste. But she
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
105
was severely depressed, for a long time, and she just sunk down into it. I couldnt do
anything for her. It was one of the things we used to fight about.
This is a pretty sick joke, Library Boy.
You want proof.
He just smiles.
How about that photo? The one you said Clare has?
The smile vanishes. Okay. I admit that I am a wee bit befuddled by that.
I met Clare for the first time in October, 1991. She met me for the first time in
September, 1977; she was six, I will be thirty-eight. Shes known me all her life. In 1991 Im
just getting to know her. By the way, you should ask Clare all this stuff. Shell tell you 
I already did. She told me.
Well, hell, Gomez. Youre taking up valuable time, here, making me tell you all over
again. You didnt believe her?
No. Would you?
Sure. Clare is very truthful. Its that Catholic upbringing that does it. Lance comes by
with more coffee. Im already highly caffeinated, but more cant hurt. So? What kind of
proof are you looking for?
Clare said you disappear.
Yeah, its one of my more dramatic parlor tricks. Stick to me like glue, and sooner or
later, I vanish. It may take minutes, hours, or days, but Im very reliable that way.
Do we know each other in 2000?
Yeah. I grin at him. Were good friends.
Tell me my future.
Oh, no. Bad idea. Nope.
Why not?
Gomez. Things happen. Knowing about them in advance makes everything.. .weird. You
cant change anything, anyway.
Why?
Causation only runs forward. Things happen once, only once. If you know things...1 feel
trapped, most of the time. If you are in time, not knowing...youre free. Trust me. He looks
frustrated. Youll be the best man at our wedding. Ill be yours. You have a great life,
Gomez. But Im not going to tell you the particulars.
Stock tips?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
106
Yeah, why not. In 2000 the stock market is insane, but there are amazing fortunes to be
made, and Gomez will be one of the lucky ones. Ever heard of the Internet? No.
Its a computer thing. A vast, worldwide network with regular people all plugged in,
communicating by phone lines with computers. You want to buy technology stocks.
Netscape, America Online, Sun Microsystems, Yahoo!, Microsoft, Amazon.com. Hes
taking notes.
Dotcom?
Dont worry about it. lust buy it at the IPO. I smile. Clap your hands if you believe in
fairies.
I thought you were pole-axing anyone who insinuated anything about fairies this
evening?
Its from Peter Pan, you illiterate. I suddenly feel nauseous. I dont want to cause a
scene here, now. I jump up. Follow me  I say, running for the mens room, Gomez close
behind me. I burst into the miraculously empty John. Sweat is streaming down my face. I
throw up into the sink. Jesus H. Christ, says Gomez. Damn it, Library but I lose the
rest of whatever hes about to say, because Im lying on my side, naked, on a cold linoleum
floor, in pitch blackness. Im dizzy, so I lie there for a while. I reach out my hand and touch
the spines of books. Im in the stacks, at the Newberry. I get up and stagger to the end of the
aisle and flip the switch; light floods the row Im standing in, blinding me. My clothes, and
the cart of books I was shelving, are in the next aisle over. I get dressed, shelve the books,
and gingerly open the security door to the stacks. I dont know what time it is; the alarms
could be on. But no, everything is as it was. Isabelle is instructing a new patron in the ways
of the Reading Room; Matt walks by and waves. The sun pours in the windows, and the
hands of the Reading Room clock point to 4:15. Ive been gone less than fifteen minutes.
Amelia sees me and points to the door. Im going out to Starbucks. You want Java?
Um, no, I dont think so. But thanks. I have a horrible headache. I stick my face into
Robertos office and tell him I dont feel well. He nods sympathetically, gestures at the
phone, which is spewing lightspeed Italian into his ear. I grab my stuff and leave.
Just another routine day at the office for Library Boy.
Sunday, December 15, 1991 (Clare is 20)
CLARE: Its a beautiful sunny Sunday morning, and Im on my way home from Henrys
apartment. The streets are icy and theres a couple inches of fresh snow. Everything is
blindingly white and clean. I am singing along with Aretha Franklin, R-E-S-P-E-C-T! as I
turn off Addison onto Hoyne, and lo and behold, theres a parking space right in front. Its
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
107
my lucky day. I park and negotiate the slick sidewalk, let myself into the vestibule, still
humming. I have that dreamy rubber spine feeling that Im beginning to associate with sex,
with waking up in Henrys bed, with getting home at all hours of the morning. I float up the
stairs. Charisse will be at church. Im looking forward to a long bath and the New York
Times. As soon as I open our door, I know Im not alone. Gomez is sitting in the living room
in a cloud of smoke with the blinds closed. What with the red flocked wallpaper and the red
velvet furniture and all the smoke, he looks like a blond Polish Elvis Satan. He just sits there,
so I start walking back to my room without speaking. Im still mad at him.
Clare.
I turn. What?
Im sorry. I was wrong. Ive never heard Gomez admit to anything less than papal
infallibility. His voice is a deep croak.
I walk into the living room and open the blinds. The sunlight is having trouble getting
through the smoke, so I crack a window. I dont see how you can smoke this much without
setting off the smoke detector.
Gomez holds up a nine-volt battery. Ill put it back before I leave.
I sit down on the Chesterfield. I wait for Gomez to tell me why hes changed his mind.
Hes rolling another cigarette. Finally he lights it, and looks at me.
I spent last night with your friend Henry.
So did I.
Yeah. What did you do?
Went to Facets, saw a Peter Greenaway film, ate Moroccan, went to his place.
And you just left.
Thats right.
Well. My evening was less cultural, but more eventful. I came upon your beamish boy in
the alley by the Vic, smashing Nick to a pulp. Trent told me this morning that Nick has a
broken nose, three broken ribs, five broken bones in his hand, soft-tissue damage, and fortysix
stitches. And hes gonna need a new front tooth. I am unmoved. Nick is a big bully.
You should have seen it, Clare. Your boyfriend dealt with Nick like he was an inanimate
object. Like Nick was a sculpture he was carving. Real scientific-like. Just considered where
to land it for maximum effect, wham. I would have totally admired it, if it hadnt been Nick.
Why was Henry beating up Nick?
Gomez looks uncomfortable. It sounded like it might have been Nicks fault. He likes to
pick on.. .gays, and Henry was dressed like Little Miss Muffet. I can imagine. Poor Henry.
And then?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
108
Then we burglarized the Army-Navy surplus store. So far so good.
And?
And then we went to Ann Sathers for dinner.
I burst out laughing. Gomez smiles. And he told me the same whacko story that you told
me.
So why did you believe him?
Well, hes so fucking nonchalant. I could tell that he absolutely knew me, through and
through. He had my number, and he didnt care. And then hevanished, and I was standing
there, and I just.. .had to. Believe.
I nod, sympathetically. The disappearing is pretty impressive. I remember that from the
very first time I saw him, when I was little. He was shaking my hand, and poof! he was gone.
Hey, when was he coming from?
2000. He looked a lot older.
He goes through a lot. Its kind of nice to sit here and talk about Henry with someone
who knows. I feel a surge of gratitude toward Gomez which evaporates as he leans forward
and says, quite gravely, Dont marry him, Clare.
He hasnt asked me, yet.
You know what I mean.
I sit very still, looking at my hands quietly clasped in my lap. Im cold and furious. I look
up. Gomez regards me anxiously.
I love him. Hes my life. Ive been waiting for him, my whole life, and now, hes here. I
dont know how to explain. With Henry, I can see everything laid out, like a map, past and
future, everything at once, like an angel....I shake my head. I cant put it into words. I can
reach into him and touch time.. .he loves me. Were married because.. .were part of each
other....I falter. Its happened already. All at once. I peer at Gomez to see if Ive made any
sense.
Clare. I like him, very much. Hes fascinating. But hes dangerous. All the women hes
been with fall apart. I just dont want you blithely waltzing into the arms of this charming
sociopath..
Dont you see that youre too late? Youre talking about somebody Ive known since I
was six. I know him. Youve met him twice and youre trying to tell me to jump off the train.
Well, I cant. Ive seen my future; I cant change it, and I wouldnt if I could.
Gomez looks thoughtful. He wouldnt tell me anything about my future.
Henry cares about you; he wouldnt do that to you.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
109
He did it to you.
It couldnt be helped; our lives are all tangled together. My whole childhood was
different because of him, and there was nothing he could do. He did the best he could. I hear
Charisses key turning in the lock.
Clare, dont be madIm just trying to help you.
I smile at him. You can help us. Youll see.
Charisse comes in coughing. Oh, sweetie. Youve been waiting a long time.
Ive been chatting with Clare. About Henry.
Im sure youve been telling her how much you adore him, Charisse says with a note of
warning in her voice.
Ive been telling her to run as fast as possible in the opposite direction.
Oh, Gomez. Clare, dont listen to him. He has terrible taste in men. Charisse sits down
primly a foot away from Gomez and he reaches over and pulls her onto his lap. She gives
him a look.
Shes always like this after church.
I want breakfast.
Of course you do, my dove. They get up and scamper down the hall to the kitchen.
Soon Charisse is emitting high-pitched giggles and Gomez is trying to spank her with the
Times Magazine. I sigh and go to my room. The sun is still shining. In the bathroom I run hot
hot water into the huge old tub and strip off last nights clothes. As I climb in I catch sight of
myself in the mirror. I look almost plump. This cheers me no end, and I sink down into the
water feeling like an Ingres odalisque. Henry loves me. Henry is here, finally, now, finally.
And I love him. I run my hands over my breasts and a thin film of saliva is reaquified by the
water and disperses. Why does everything have to be complicated? Isnt the complicated part
behind us now? I submerge my hair, watch it float around me, dark and net-like. I never
chose Henry, and he never chose me. So how could it be a mistake? Again I am faced with
the fact that we cant know. I lie in the tub, staring at the tile above my feet, until the water is
almost cool. Charisse knocks on the door, asking if Ive died in here and can she please brush
her teeth? As I wrap my hair in a towel I see myself blurred in the mirror by steam and time
seems to fold over onto itself and I see myself as a layering of all my previous days and years
and all the time that is coming and suddenly I feel as though Ive become invisible. But then
the feeling is gone as fast as it came and I stand still for a minute and then I pull on my
bathrobe and open the door and go on.
Saturday, December 22, 1991 (Henry is 28, and 33)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
110
HENRY: At 5:25 a.m. the doorbell rings, always an evil omen. I stagger to the intercom and
push the button.
Yeah?
Hey. Let me in. I press the button again and the horrible buzzing noise that signifies
Welcome to My Hearth and Home is transmitted over the line. Forty-five seconds later the
elevator clunks and starts to ratchet its way up. I pull on my robe, I go out and stand in the
hall and watch the elevator cables moving through the little safety-glass window. The cage
hovers into sight and stops, and sure enough, its me.
He slides open the cage door and steps into the corridor, naked, unshaven, and sporting
really short hair. We quickly cross the empty hall and duck into the apartment. I close the
door and we stand for a moment looking ourselves over.
Well, I say, just for something to say. How goes it?
So-so. Whats the date?
December 22, 1991. Saturday
OhViolent Femmes at the Aragon tonight?
Yep.
He laughs. Shit. What an abysmal evening that was. He walks over to the bed my
bedand climbs in, pulls the covers over his head. I plop down beside him.
Hey. No response. When are you from?
November 13, 1996. I was on my way to bed. So let me get some sleep, or you will be
sincerely sorry in five years.
This seems reasonable enough. I take off my robe and get back into bed. Now Im on the
wrong side of the bed, Clares side, as I think of it these days, because my doppelganger has
commandeered my side.
Everything is subtly different on this side of the bed. Its like when you close one eye and
look at something close up for a while, and then look at it from the other eye. I lie there
doing this, looking at the armchair with my clothes scattered over it, a peach pit at the bottom
of a wine glass on the windowsill, the back of my right hand. My nails need cutting and the
apartment could probably qualify for Federal Disaster Relief funds. Maybe my extra self will
be willing to pitch in, help out around the house a little, earn his keep. I run my mind over
the contents of the refrigerator and pantry and conclude that we are well provisioned. I am
planning to bring Clare home with me tonight and Im not sure what to do with my
superfluous body. It occurs to me that Clare might prefer to be with this later edition of me,
since after all they do know each other better. For some reason this plunges me into a funk. I
try to remember that anything subtracted now will be added later, but I still feel fretful and
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
111
wish that one of us would just go away.
I ponder my double. Hes curled up, hedgehog style, facing away from me, evidently
asleep. I envy him. He is me, but Im not him, yet. He has been through five years of a life
thats still mysterious to me, still coiled tightly waiting to spring out and bite. Of course,
whatever pleasures are to be had, hes had them; for me they wait like a box of unpoked
chocolates.
I try to consider him with Clares eyes. Why the short hair? Ive always been fond of my
black, wavy, shoulder-length hair; Ive been wearing it this way since high school. But
sooner or later, Im going to chop it off. It occurs to me that the hair is one of many things
that must remind Clare Im not exactly the man shes known from earliest childhood. Im a
close approximation she is guiding surreptitiously toward a me that exists in her minds eye.
What would I be without her?
Not the man who breathes, slowly, deeply, across the bed from me. His neck and back
undulate with vertebrae, ribs. His skin is smooth, hardly haired, tightly tacked onto muscles
and bones. He is exhausted, and yet sleeps as though at any moment he may jump up and
run. Do I radiate this much tension? I guess so. Clare complains that I dont relax until Im
dead tired, but actually I am often relaxed when Im with her. This older self seems leaner
and more weary, more solid and secure. But with me he can afford to show off: hes got my
number so completely that I can only acquiesce to him, in my own best interests.
Its 7:14 and its obvious that Im not going back to sleep. I get out of bed and turn on the
coffee. I pull on underwear and sweatpants and stretch out. Lately my knees have been sore,
so I wrap supports onto them. I pull on socks and lace up my beater running shoes, probably
the cause of the funky knees, and vow to go buy new shoes tomorrow. I should have asked
my guest what the weather was like out there. Oh, well, December in Chicago: dreadful
weather is de rigueur. I don my ancient Chicago Film Festival T-shirt, a black sweatshirt,
and a heavy orange sweatshirt with a hood that has big Xs on the front and back made of
reflective tape. I grab my gloves and keys and out I go, into the day.
Its not a bad day, as early winter days go. Theres very little snow on the ground, and the
wind is toying with it, pushing it here and there. Traffic is backed up on Dearborn, making a
concert of engine noises, and the sky is gray, slowly lightening into gray.
I lace my keys onto my shoe and decide to run along the lake. I run slowly east on
Delaware to Michigan Avenue, cross the overpass, and begin jogging beside the bike path,
heading north along Oak Street Beach. Only hard-core runners and cyclists are out today.
Lake Michigan is a deep slate color and the tide is out, revealing a dark brown strip of sand.
Seagulls wheel above my head and far out over the water. I am moving stiffly; cold is unkind
to joints, and Im slowly realizing that it is pretty cold out here by the lake, probably in the
low twenties. So I run a little slower than usual, warming up, reminding my poor knees and
ankles that their lifes work is to carry me far and fast on demand. I can feel the cold dry air
in my lungs, feel my heart serenely pounding, and as I reach North Avenue I am feeling good
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
112
and I start to speed up. Running is many things to me: survival, calmness, euphoria, solitude.
It is proof of my corporeal existence, my ability to control my movement through space if
not time, and the obedience, however temporary, of my body to my will. As I run I displace
air, and things come and go around me, and the path moves like a filmstrip beneath my feet. I
remember, as a child, long before video games and the Web, threading filmstrips into the
dinky projector in the school library and peering into them, turning the knob that advanced
the frame at the sound of a beep. I dont remember anymore what they looked like, what they
were about, but I remember the smell of the library, and the way the beep made me jump
every time. Im flying now, that golden feeling, as if I could run right into the air, and Im
invincible, nothing can stop me, nothing can stop me, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing.
Evening, the same day: (Henry is 28 and 33, Clare is 20)
CLARE: Were on our way to the Violent Femmes concert at the Aragon Ballroom. After
some reluctance on Henrys part, which I dont understand because he loves les Femmes, we
are cruising Uptown in search of parking. I loop around and around, past the Green Mill, the
bars, the dimly lit apartment buildings and the laundromats that look like stage sets. I finally
park on Argyle and we walk shivering down the glassy broken sidewalks. Henry walks fast
and I am always a little out of breath when we walk together. Ive noticed that he makes an
effort to match my pace, now. I pull off my glove and put my hand in his coat pocket, and he
puts his arm around my shoulder. Im excited because Henry and I have never gone dancing
before, and I love the Aragon, in all its decaying faux Spanish splendor. My Grandma
Meagram used to tell me about dancing to the big bands here in the thirties, when everything
was new and lovely and there werent people shooting up in the balconies and lakes of piss
in the mens room. But cest la vie, times change, and we are here.
We stand in line for a few minutes. Henry seems tense, on guard. He holds my hand, but
stares out over the crowd. I take the opportunity to look at him. Henry is beautiful. His hair is
shoulder-length, combed back, black and sleek. Hes cat-like, thin, exuding restlessness and
physicality. He looks like he might bite. Henry is wearing a black overcoat and a white
cotton shirt with French cuffs which dangle undone below his coat sleeves, a lovely acidgreen
silk tie which he has loosened just enough so that I can see the muscles in his neck,
black jeans and black high-top sneakers. Henry gathers my hair together and wraps it around
his wrist. For a moment I am his prisoner, and then the line moves forward and he lets me go.
We are ticketed and flow with masses of people into the building. The Aragon has
numerous long hallways and alcoves and balconies that wrap around the main hall and are
ideal for getting lost and for hiding, Henry and I go up to a balcony close to the stage and sit
at a tiny table. We take off our coats. Henry is staring at me.
You look lovely. Thats a great dress; I cant believe you can dance in it.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
113
My dress is skin-tight lilac blue silk, but it stretches enough to move in. I tried it out this
afternoon in front of a mirror and it was fine. The thing that worries me is my hair; because
of the dry winter air there seems to be twice as much of it as usual. I start to braid it and
Henry stops me.
Dont, pleaseI want to look at you with it down.
The opening act begins its set. We listen patiently. Everyone is milling around, talking,
smoking. There are no seats on the main floor. The noise is phenomenal.
Henry leans over and yells in my ear. Do you want something to drink?
Just a Coke.
He goes off to the bar. I rest my arms on the railing of the balcony and watch the crowd.
Girls in vintage dresses, girls in combat gear, boys with Mohawks, boys in flannel shirts.
People of both sexes in T-shirts and jeans. College kids and twenty-somethings, with a few
old folks scattered in.
Henry is gone for a long time. The warm-up band finishes, to scattered applause, and
roadies begin removing the bands equipment and bringing on a more or less identical bunch
of instruments. Eventually I get tired of waiting, and, abandoning our table and coats, I force
my way through the dense pack of people on the balcony down the stairs and into the long
dim hallway where the bar is. Henrys not there. I move slowly through the halls and
alcoves, looking but trying not to look like Im looking.
I spot him at the end of a hallway. He is standing so close to the woman that at first I
think they are embracing; she has her back to the wall and Henry leans over her with his
hand braced against the wall above her shoulder. The intimacy of their pose takes my breath.
She is blond, and beautiful in a very German way, tall and dramatic.
As I get closer, I realize that they arent kissing; they are fighting. Henry is using his free
hand to emphasize whatever it is he is yelling at this woman. Suddenly her impassive face
breaks into anger, almost tears. She screams something back at him. Henry steps back and
throws up his hands. I hear the last of it as he walks away:
I cant, Ingrid, I just cant! Im sorry
Henry! She is running after him when they both see me, standing quite still in the
middle of the corridor. Henry is grim as he takes my arm and we walk quickly to the stairs.
Three steps up I turn and see her standing, watching us, her arms at her sides, helpless and
intense. Henry glances back, and we turn and continue up the stairs.
We find our table, which miraculously is still free and still boasts our coats. The lights arc
going down and Henry raises his voice over the noise of the crowd. Im sorry. I never made
it as far as the bar, and I ran into Ingrid
Who is Ingrid? I think of myself standing in Henrys bathroom with a lipstick in my hand
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
114
and I need to know but blackness descends and the Violent Femmes take the stage.
Gordon Gano stands at the microphone glaring at us all and menacing chords ring out and
he leans forward and intones the opening lines of Blister in the Sun and were off and
running. Henry and I sit and listen and then he leans over to me and shouts, Do you want to
leave? The dance floor is a roiling mass of slamming humanity.
I want to dance!
Henry looks relieved. Great! Yes! Come on! He strips off his tie and shoves it in his
overcoat pocket. We wend our way back downstairs and enter the main hall. I see Charisse
and Gomez dancing more or less together. Charisse is oblivious and frenzied, Gomez is
barely moving, a cigarette absolutely level between his lips. He sees me and gives me a little
wave. Moving into the crowd is like wading in Lake Michigan; we are taken in and buoyed
along, floating toward the stage. The crowd is roaring Add it up! Add it up! and the Femmes
respond by attacking their instruments with insane vigor, Henry is moving, vibrating with the
bass line. We are just outside the mosh pit, dancers slamming against each other at high
velocity on one side and on the other side dancers shaking their hips, flailing their arms,
stepping to the music.
We dance. The music runs through me, waves of sound that grab me by the spine, that
move my feet my hips my shoulders without consulting my brain. (Beautiful girl, love your
dress, high school smile, oh yes, where she is now, I can only guess.) I open my eyes and see
Henry watching me while he dances. When I raise my arms he grasps me around the waist
and I leap up. I have a panoramic view of the dance floor for a mighty eternity. Someone
waves at me but before I can see who it is Henry sets me down again. We dance touching,
we dance apart. (How can I explain personal pain?) Sweat is streaming down me. Henry
shakes his head and his hair makes a black blur and his sweat is all over me. The music is
goading, mocking (I aint had much to live for I aint had much to live for I aint had much
to live for). We throw ourselves at it. My body is elastic, my legs are numb, and a sensation
of white heat travels from my crotch to the top of my head. My hair is damp ropes that cling
to my arms and neck and face and back. The music crashes into a wall and stops. My heart is
pounding. I place my hand on Henrys chest and am surprised that his seems only slightly
quickened.
Slightly later, I walk into the ladies room and see Ingrid sitting on a sink, crying. A small
black woman with beautiful long dreads is standing in front of her speaking softly and
stroking her hair. The sound of Ingrids sobs echoes off the dank yellow tile. I start to back
out of the room and my movement attracts their attention. They look at me. Ingrid is a mess.
All her Teutonic cool is gone, her face is red and puffy, her makeup is in streaks. She stares
at me, bleak and drained. The black woman walks over to me. She is fine and delicate and
dark and sad. She stands close and speaks quietly.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
115
Sister, she says, whats your name?
I hesitate. Clare, I finally say.
She looks back at Ingrid. Clare. A word to the wise. You are mixing in where youre not
wanted. Henry, hes bad news, but hes Ingrids bad news, and you be a fool to mess with
him. You hear what Im saying?
I dont want to know but I cant help myself. What are you talking about?
They were going to get married. Then Henry, he breaks it off, tells Ingrid hes sorry,
never mind, just forget it. I say shes better off without him, but she dont listen. He treats her
bad, drinks like they aint making it no more, disappears for days and then comes around like
nothing happened, sleeps with anything that stands still long enough. Thats Henry. When he
makes you moan and cry, dont say nobody never told you. She turns abruptly and walks
back to Ingrid, who is still staring at me, who is looking at me with unconditional despair.
I must be gaping at them. Im sorry, I say, and I flee.
I wander the halls and finally find an alcove thats empty except for a young Goth girl
passed out on a vinyl couch with a burning cigarette between her fingers. I take it from her
and stub it out on the filthy tile. I sit on the arm of the couch and the music vibrates through
my tailbone up my spine. I can feel it in my teeth. I still need to pee and my head hurts. I
want to cry. I dont understand what just happened. That is, I understand but I dont know
what I should do about it. I dont know if I should just forget it, or get upset at Henry and
demand an explanation, or what. What did I expect? I wish I could send a postcard into the
past, to this cad Henry who I dont know: Do nothing, Wait for me. Wish you were here.
Henry sticks his head around the corner. There you are. I thought Id lost you.
Short hair. Henry has either gotten his hair cut in the last half hour or Im looking at my
favorite chrono-displaced person. I jump up and fling myself at him.
Oompfhey, glad to see you, too...
Ive missed you now I am crying.
Youve been with me almost nonstop for weeks.
I know butyoure not you, yetI mean, youre different. Damn. I lean against the
wall and Henry presses against me. We kiss, and then Henry starts licking my face like a
mama cat. I try to purr and start laughing. You asshole. Youre trying to distract me from
your infamous behavior
What behavior? I didnt know you existed. I was unhappily dating Ingrid. I met you. I
broke up with Ingrid less than twenty-four hours later. I mean, infidelity isnt retroactive, you
know?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
116
She said
Who said?
The black woman. I mime long hair. Short, big eyes, dreads
Oh Lord. Thats Celia Attley. She despises me. Shes in love with Ingrid.
She said you were going to marry Ingrid. That you drink all the time, fuck around, and
are basically a bad person and I should run. Thats what she said.
Henry is torn between mirth and incredulity. Well, some of that is actually true. I did
fuck around, a lot, and I certainly have been known to drink rather prodigiously. But we
werent engaged. I would never have been insane enough to marry Ingrid. We were royally
miserable together.
But then why
Clare, very few people meet their soulmates at age six. So you gotta pass the time
somehow. And Ingrid was verypatient. Overly patient. Willing to put up with odd
behavior, in the hope that someday I would shape up and marry her martyred ass. And when
somebody is that patient, you have to feel grateful, and then you want to hurt them. Does that
make any sense?
I guess. I mean, no, not to me, but I dont think that way.
Henry sighs. Its very charming of you to be ignorant of the twisted logic of most
relationships. Trust me. When we met I was wrecked, blasted, and damned, and I am slowly
pulling myself together because I can see that you are a human being and I would like to be
one, too. And I have been trying to do it without you noticing, because I still havent figured
out that all pretense is useless between us. But its a long way from the me youre dealing
with in 1991 to me, talking to you right now from 1996. You have to work at me; I cant get
there alone.
Yes, but its hard. Im not used to being the teacher.
Well, whenever you feel discouraged, think of all the hours I spent, am spending, with
your tiny self. New math and botany, spelling and American history. I mean, you can say
nasty things to me in French because I sat there and drilled you on them.
Too true. Il a les defauts de ses qualites. But I bet its easier to teach all that than to teach
how to behappy.
But you make me happy. Its living up to being happy thats the difficult part. Henry is
playing with my hair, twirling it into little knots. Listen, Clare, Im going to return you to
the poor imbecile you came in with. Im sitting upstairs feeling depressed and wondering
where you are.
I realize that I have forgotten my present Henry in my joy at seeing my once and future
Henry, and I am ashamed. I feel an almost maternal longing to go solace the strange boy who
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
117
is becoming the man before me, the one who kisses me and leaves me with an admonition to
be nice. As I walk up the stairs I see the Henry of my future fling himself into the midst of
the slam dancers, and I move as in a dream to find the Henry who is my here and now.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
118
CHRISTMAS EVE, THREE
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, December 24, 25, 26, 1991 (Clare is 20, Henry is 28)
CLARE: Its 8:32 a.m. on the twenty-fourth of December and Henry and I are on our way to
Meadowlark House for Christmas. Its a beautiful clear day, no snow here in Chicago, but six
inches on the ground in South Haven. Before we left, Henry spent time repacking the car,
checking the tires, looking under the hood. I dont think he had the slightest idea what he was
looking at. My car is a very cute 1990 white Honda Civic, and I love it, but Henry really
hates riding in cars, especially small cars. Hes a horrible passenger, holding onto the armrest
and braking the whole time were in transit. He would probably be less afraid if he could be
the driver, but for obvious reasons Henry doesnt have a drivers license. So we are sailing
along the Indiana Toll Road on this fine winter day; Im calm and looking forward to seeing
my family and Henry is a basket case. It doesnt help that he didnt run this morning; Ive
noticed that Henry needs an incredible amount of physical activity all the time in order to be
happy. Its like hanging out with a greyhound. Its different being with Henry in real time.
When I was growing up Henry came and went, and our encounters were concentrated and
dramatic and unsettling. Henry had a lot of stuff he wasnt going to tell me, and most of the
time he wouldnt let me get anywhere near him, so I always had this intense, unsatisfied
feeling. When I finally found him in the present, I thought it would be like that. But in fact
its so much better, in many ways. First and foremost, instead of refusing to touch me at all,
Henry is constantly touching me, kissing me, making love to me. I feel as though I have
become a different person, one who is bathed in a warm pool of desire. And he tells me
things! Anything I ask him about himself, his life, his familyhe tells me, with names,
places, dates. Things that seemed utterly mysterious to me as a child are revealed as perfectly
logical. But the best thing of all is that I see him for long stretches of timehours, days. I
know where to find him. He goes to work, he comes home. Sometimes I open my address
book just to look at the entry: Henry DeTamble, 714 Dearborn, lie, Chicago, IL 60610, 312-
431-8313. A last name, an address, a phone number. lean call him on the phone. Its a
miracle. I feel like Dorothy, when her house crash-landed in Oz and the world turned from
black and white to color. Were not in Kansas anymore.
In fact, were about to cross into Michigan, and theres a rest stop. I pull into the parking
lot, and we get out and stretch our legs. We head into the building, and theres the maps and
brochures for the tourists, and the huge bank of vending machines.
Wow, Henry says. He goes over and inspects all the junk food, and then starts reading
the brochures. Hey, lets go to Frankenmuth! Christmas 365 Days a Year! God, Id
commit hara-kiri after about an hour of that. Do you have any change?
I find a fistful of change in the bottom of my purse and we gleefully spend it on two
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
119
Cokes, a box of Good & Plenty, and a Hershey bar. We walk back out into the dry cold air,
arm in arm. In the car, we open our Cokes and consume sugar. Henry looks at my watch.
Such decadence. Its only 9:15.
Well, in a couple minutes, itll be 10:15.
Oh, right, Michigans an hour ahead. How surreal.
I look over at him. Everything is surreal. I cant believe youre actually going to meet
my family. Ive spent so much time hiding you from my family.
Only because I adore you beyond reason am I doing this. I have spent a lot of time
avoiding road trips, meeting girls families, and Christmas. The fact that I am enduring all
three at once proves that I love you.
Henry I turn to him; we kiss. The kiss starts to evolve into something more when out
of the corner of my eye I see three prepubescent boys and a large dog standing a few feet
away from us, watching with interest. Henry turns to see what I am looking at and the boys
all grin and give us the thumbs up. They amble off to their parents van.
By the waywhat are the sleeping arrangements at your house?
Oh, dear. Etta called me yesterday about that. Im in my own room and you are in the
blue room. Were down the hall from each other, with my parents and Alicia in between.
And how committed are we to maintaining this?
I start the car and we get back on the highway. I dont know because Ive never done this
before. Mark just brings his girlfriends downstairs to the rec room and boffs them on the
couch in the wee hours, and we all pretend not to notice. If things are difficult we can always
go down to the Reading Room; I used to hide you down there.
Hmm. Oh, well. Henry looks out the window for a while. You know, this isnt too
bad.
What?
Riding. In a car. On the highway.
Golly. Next youll be getting on planes.
Never.
Paris. Cairo. London. Kyoto.
No way. I am convinced that I would time travel and Lord knows if I would be able to
get back to something flying 350 miles an hour. Id end up falling out of the sky a la Icarus.
Seriously?
Im not planning to find out for sure.
Could you get there by time travel?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
120
Well. Heres my theory. Now, this is only a Special Theory of Time Travel as Performed
by Henry DeTamble, and not a General Theory of Time Travel.
Okay.
First of all, I think its a brain thing. I think its a lot like epilepsy, because it tends to
happen when Im stressed, and there are physical cues, like flashing light, that can prompt it.
And because things like running, and sex, and meditation tend to help me stay put in the
present. Secondly, I have absolutely no conscious control over when or where I go, how long
I stay, or when I come back. So time travel tours of the Riviera are very unlikely. Having
said that, my subconscious seems to exert tremendous control, because I spend a lot of time
in my own past, visiting events that are interesting or important, and evidently I will be
spending enormous amounts of time visiting you, which I am looking forward to immensely.
I tend to go to places Ive already been in real time, although I do find myself in other, more
random times and places. I tend to go to the past, rather than the future.
Youve been to the future? I didnt know you could do that.
Henry is looking pleased with himself. So far, my range is about fifty years in each
direction. But I very rarely go to the future, and I dont think Ive ever seen much of anything
there that I found useful. Its always quite brief. And maybe I just dont know what Im
looking at. Its the past that exerts a lot of pull. In the past I feel much more solid. Maybe the
future itself is less substantial? I dont know. I always feel like Im breathing thin air, out
there in the future. Thats one of the ways I can tell it is the future: it feels different. Its
harder to run, there. Henry says this thoughtfully, and I suddenly have a glimpse of the
terror of being in a foreign time and place, without clothes, without friends...
Thats why your feet
Are like leather. The soles of Henrys feet have thick calluses, as though they are trying
to become shoes. I am a beast of the hoof. If anything ever happens to my feet you might as
well shoot me.
We ride on in silence for a while. The road rises and dips, dead fields of cornstalks flash
by. Farmhouses stand washed in the winter sun, each with their vans and horse trailers and
American cars lined up in the long driveways. I sigh. Going home is such a mixed
experience. Im dying to see Alicia and Etta, and Im worried about my mother, and I dont
especially feel like dealing with my father and Mark. But Im curious to see how they deal
with Henry, and he with them. Im proud of the fact that I kept Henry a secret for so long.
Fourteen years. When youre a kid fourteen years is forever.
We pass a Wal-Mart, a Dairy Queen, a McDonalds. More cornfields. An orchard. UPick-M
Strawberries, Blueberries. In the summer this road is a long corridor of fruit, grain,
and capitalism. But now the fields are dead and dry and the cars speed along the sunny cold
highway ignoring the beckoning parking lots.
I never thought much about South Haven until I moved to Chicago. Our house always
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
121
seemed like an island, sitting in the unincorporated area to the south, surrounded by the
Meadow, orchards, woods, farms, and South Haven was just Town, as in Lets go to Town
and get an ice cream. Town was groceries and hardware and Mackenzies Bakery and the
sheet music and records at the Music Emporium, Alicias favorite store. We used to stand in
front of Appleyards Photography Studio making up stories about the brides and toddlers and
families smiling their hideous smiles in the window. We didnt think the library was funnylooking
in its faux Greek splendor, nor did we find the cuisine limited and bland, or the
movies at the Michigan Theater relentlessly American and mindless. These were opinions I
came to later, after I became a denizen of a City, an expatriate anxious to distance herself
from the bumpkin ways of her youth. I am suddenly consumed by nostalgia for the little girl
who was me, who loved the fields and believed in God, who spent winter days home sick
from school reading Nancy Drew and sucking menthol cough drops, who could keep a
secret. I glance over at Henry and see that he has fallen asleep.
South Haven, fifty miles.
Twenty-six, twelve, three, one.
Phoenix Road.
Blue Star Highway.
And then: Meagram Lane. I reach over to wake Henry but hes already awake. He smiles
nervously and looks out the window at the endless tunnel of bare winter trees as we hurtle
along, and as the gate comes into view I fumble in the glove compartment for the opener and
the gates swing apart and we pass through.
The house appears like a pop-up in a book. Henry gasps, and starts to laugh.
What? I say defensively.
I didnt realize it was so huge. How many rooms does this monster have?
Twenty-four, I tell him. Etta is waving at us from the hall window as I pull around the
drive and stop near the front door. Her hair is grayer than last time I was here, but her face is
pink with pleasure. As we climb out of the car shes gingerly picking her way down the icy
front steps in no coat and her good navy blue dress with the lace collar, carefully balancing
her stout figure over her sensible shoes, and I run over to her to take her arm but she bats me
away until shes at the bottom and then she gives me a hug and a kiss (I breathe in Ettas
smell of Noxzema and powder so gladly) as Henry stands by, waiting. And what have we
here? she says as though Henry is a small child I have brought along unannounced. Etta
Milbauer, Henry DeTamble, I introduce. I see a little Oh on Henrys face and I wonder
who he thought she was. Etta beams at Henry as we climb the steps. She opens the front
door. Henry lowers his voice and asks me, What about our stuff? and I tell him that Peter
will deal with it. Where is everyone? I ask, and Etta says that lunch is in fifteen minutes
and we can take off our coats and wash and go right in. She leaves us standing in the hall and
retreats to the kitchen. I turn, take off my coat and hang it in the hall closet. When I turn back
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
122
to Henry he is waving at someone. I peer around him and see Nell sticking her broad, snubnosed
face out of the dining room door, grinning, and I run down the hall and give her a big
sloppy kiss and she chuckles at me and says, Pretty man, monkey girl, and ducks back into
the other room before Henry can reach us.
Nell? he guesses and I nod. Shes not shy, just busy, I explain. I lead him up the back
stairs to the second floor. Youre in here, I tell him, opening the door to the blue bedroom.
He glances in and follows me down the hall. This is my room, I say apprehensively and
Henry slips around me and stands in the middle of the rug just looking and when he turns to
me I see that he doesnt recognize anything; nothing in the room means a thing to him, and
the knife of realization sinks in deeper: all the little tokens and souvenirs in this museum of
our past are as love letters to an illiterate. Henry picks up a wrens nest (it happens to be the
first of all the many birds nests he gave me over the years) and says, Nice. I nod, and open
my mouth to tell him and he puts it back on the shelf and says, Does that door lock? and I
flip the lock and were late for lunch.
HENRY: Im almost calm as I follow Clare down the stairs, through the dark cold hall and
into the dining room. Everyone is already eating. The room is low ceilinged and comfortable
in a William Morrisy sort of way; the air is warm from the fire crackling in the small
fireplace and the windows are so frosted over that I cant see out. Clare goes over to a thin
woman with pale red hair who must be her mother, who tilts her head to receive Clares kiss,
who half rises to shake my hand. Clare introduces her to me as my mother and I call her
Mrs. Abshire and she immediately says Oh, but you must call me Lucille, everyone
does, and smiles in an exhausted but warm sort of way, as though she is a brilliant sun in
some other galaxy. We take our seats across the table from each other. Clare is sitting
between Mark and an elderly woman who turns out to be her Great Aunt Dulcie; I am sitting
between Alicia and a plump pretty blond girl who is introduced as Sharon and who seems to
be with Mark. Clares father sits at the head of the table and my first impression is that he is
deeply disturbed by me. Handsome, truculent Mark seems equally unnerved. Theyve seen
me before. I wonder what I was doing that caused them to notice me, remember me, recoil
ever so slightly in aversion when Clare introduces me. But Philip Abshire is a lawyer, and
master of his features, and within a minute he is affable and smiling, the host, my girlfriends
dad, a balding middle-aged man with aviator glasses and an athletic body gone soft and
paunchy but strong hands, tennis-playing hands, gray eyes that continue to regard me warily
despite the confidential grin. Mark has a harder time concealing his distress, and every time I
catch his eye he looks at his plate. Alicia is not what I expected; she is matter-of-fact and
kind, but a little odd, absent. She has Philips dark hair, like Mark, and Lucilles features,
sort of; Alicia looks as though someone had tried to combine Clare and Mark but had given
up and thrown in some Eleanor Roosevelt to fill in the gaps. Philip says something and
Alicia laughs, and suddenly she is lovely and I turn to her in surprise as she rises from the
table.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
123
Ive got to go to St. Basils, she informs me. Ive got a rehearsal. Are you coming to
church? I dart a look at Clare, who nods slightly, and I tell Alicia Of course, and as
everyone sighs withwhat? relief? I remember that Christmas is, after all, a Christian
holiday in addition to being my own personal day of atonement. Alicia leaves. I imagine my
mother laughing at me, her well-plucked eyebrows raised high at the sight of her half-Jewish
son marooned in the midst of Christmas in Goyland, and I mentally shake my finger at her.
You should talk, I tell her. You married an Episcopalian. I look at my plate and its ham,
with peas and an effete little salad. I dont eat pork and I hate peas.
Clare tells us youre a librarian, Philip assays, and I admit that this is so. We have a
chipper little discussion about the Newberry and people who are Newberry trustees and also
clients of Philips firm, which apparently is based in Chicago, in which case I am not clear
about why Clares family lives way up here in Michigan.
Summer homes, he tells me, and I remember Clare explaining that her father specializes
in wills and trusts. I picture elderly rich people reclining on their private beaches, slathering
on sunblock and deciding to cut Junior out of the will, reaching for their cell phones to call
Philip. I recollect that Avi, who is first chair to my fathers second at the CSO, has a house
around here somewhere. I mention this and everyones ears perk.
Do you know him? Lucille asks.
Sure. He and my dad sit right next to each other.
Sit next to each other?
Well, you know. First and second violin.
Your father is a violinist?
Yeah. I look at Clare, who is staring at her mother with a dont embarrass me
expression on her face.
And he plays for the Chicago Symphony Orchestra?
Yes.
Lucille s face is suffused with pink; now I know where Clare gets her blushes. Do you
think he would listen to Alicia play? If we gave him a tape?
I grimly hope that Alicia is very, very good. People are constantly bestowing tapes on
Dad. Then I have a better idea.
Alicia is a cellist, isnt she?
Yes.
Is she looking for a teacher?
Philip interjects: She studies with Frank Wainwright in Kalamazoo.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
124
Because I could give the tape to Yoshi Akawa. One of his students just left to take a job
in Paris. Yoshi is a great guy and first chair cello. I know hell at least listen to the tape; my
dad, who doesnt teach, will simply pitch it out. Lucille is effusive; even Philip seems
pleased. Clare looks relieved. Mark eats. Great Aunt Dulcie, pink-haired and tiny, is
oblivious to this whole exchange. Perhaps shes deaf? I glance at Sharon, who is sitting on
my left and who hasnt said a word. She looks miserable. Philip and Lucille are discussing
which tape they should give me, or perhaps Alicia should make a new one? I ask Sharon if
this is her first time up here and she nods. Just as Im about to ask her another question Philip
asks me what my mother does and I blink; I give Clare a look that says Didnt you tell them
anything?
My mother was a singer. Shes dead.
Clare says, quietly, Henrys mother was Annette Lyn Robinson. She might as well have
told them my mom was the Virgin Mary; Philips face lights up. Lucille makes a little
fluttering motion with her hands.
Unbelievablefantastic! We have all her recordings und so wiete. But then Lucille
says, I met her when I was young. My father took me to hear Madama Butterfly, and he
knew someone who took us backstage afterward, and we went to her dressing room, and she
was there, and all these flowers! and she had her little boywhy, that was you!
I nod, trying to find my voice. Clare says, What did she look like?
Mark says, Are we going skiing this afternoon? Philip nods. Lucille smiles, lost in
memory. She was so beautifulshe still had the wig on, that long black hair, and she was
teasing the little boy with it, tickling him, and he was dancing around. She had such lovely
hands, and she was just my height, so slender, and she was Jewish, you know, but I thought
she looked more Italian Lucille breaks off and her hand flies to her mouth, and her eyes
dart to my plate, which is clean except for a few peas.
Are you Jewish? Mark asks, pleasantly.
I suppose I could be, if I wanted, but nobody ever made a point of it. She died when I
was six, and my dads a lapsed Episcopalian.
You look just like her Lucille volunteers, and I thank her. Our plates are removed by
Etta, who asks Sharon and me if we drink coffee. We both say Yes at the same time, so
emphatically that Clares whole family laughs. Etta gives us a motherly smile and minutes
later she sets steaming cups of coffee in front of us and I think That wasnt so bad after all.
Everyone talks about skiing, and the weather, and we all stand up and Philip and Mark walk
into the hall together; I ask Clare if shes going skiing and she shrugs and asks me if I want
to and I explain that I dont ski and have no interest in learning. She decides to go anyway
after Lucille says that she needs someone to help with her bindings. As we walk up the stairs
I hear Mark say, incredible resemblance and I smile to myself.
Later, after everyone has left and the house is quiet, I venture down from my chilly room
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
125
in search of warmth and more coffee. I walk through the dining room and into the kitchen
and am confronted by an amazing array of glassware, silver, cakes, peeled vegetables, and
roasting pans in a kitchen that looks like something youd see in a four-star restaurant. In the
midst of it all stands Nell with her back to me, singing Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer and
waggling her large hips, waving a baster at a young black girl who points at me mutely. Nell
turns around and smiles a huge gap-toothed smile and then says, What are you doin in my
kitchen, Mister Boyfriend?
I was wondering if you have any coffee left?
Left? What do you think, I let coffee sit around all day gettin vile? Shoo, son, get out of
here and go sit in the living room and pull on the bell and I will make you some fresh coffee.
Didnt your mama teach you about coffee?
Actually, my mother wasnt much of a cook I tell her, venturing closer to the center of
the vortex. Something smells wonderful. What are you making?
What youre smellin is a Thompsons Turkey, Nell says. She opens the oven to show
me a monstrous turkey that looks like something thats been in the Great Chicago Fire. Its
completely black. Dont look so dubious, boy. Underneath that crust is the best eatin turkey
on Planet Earth.
I am willing to believe her; the smell is perfect. What is a Thompsons Turkey? I ask,
and Nell discourses on the miraculous properties of the Thompsons Turkey, invented by
Morton Thompson, a newspaperman, in the 1930s. Apparently the production of this
marvelous beast involves a great deal of stuffing, basting, and turning. Nell allows me to stay
in her kitchen while she makes me coffee and wrangles the turkey out of the oven and
wrestles it onto its back and then artfully drools cider gravy all over it before shoving it back
into the chamber. There are twelve lobsters crawling around in a large plastic tub of water by
the sink. Pets? I tease her, and she replies, Thats your Christmas dinner, son; you want to
pick one out? Youre not a vegetarian, are you? I assure her that I am not, that I am a good
boy who eats whatever is put in front of him.
Youd never know it, you so thin, Nell says. Im gonna feed you up.
Thats why Clare brought me.
Hmm, Nell says, pleased. Awright, then. Now scat so I can get on, here. I take my
large mug of fragrant coffee and wend my way to the living room, where there is a huge
Christmas tree and a fire. It looks like an ad for Pottery Barn. I settle myself in an orange
wing chair by the fire and am riffing through the pile of newspapers when someone says,
Whered you get the coffee? and I look up and see Sharon sitting across from me in a blue
armchair that exactly matches her sweater.
Hi I say. Im sorry
Thats okay, Sharon says.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
126
I went to the kitchen, but I guess were supposed to use the bell, wherever that is. We
scan the room and sure enough, theres a bell pull in the corner.
This is so weird, Sharon says. Weve been here since yesterday and Ive been just kind
of creeping around, you know, afraid to use the wrong fork or something...
Where are you from?
Florida. She laughs. I never had a white Christmas til I got to Harvard. My dad owns
a gas station in Jacksonville. I figured after school Id go back there, you know, cause I
dont like the cold, but now I guess Im stuck.
How come?
Sharon looks surprised. Didnt they tell you? Mark and I are getting married.
I wonder if Clare knows this; it seems like something she would have mentioned. Then I
notice the diamond on Sharons finger. Congratulations.
I guess. I mean, thank you.
Um, arent you sure? About getting married? Sharon actually looks like shes been
crying; shes all puffy around the eyes.
Well, Im pregnant. So...
Well, it doesnt necessarily follow
Yeah it does. If youre Catholic. Sharon sighs, and slouches into the chair. I actually
know several Catholic girls who have had abortions and werent struck down by lightning,
but apparently Sharons is a less accommodating faith.
Well, congratulations. Uh, when...?
January eleventh. She sees my surprise and says, Oh, the baby? April. She makes a
face. I hope its over spring break, because otherwise I dont see how Ill managenot that
it matters so much now....
Whats your major?
Premed. My parents are furious. Theyre leaning on me to give it up for adoption.
Dont they like Mark?
Theyve never even met Mark, its not that, theyre just afraid I wont go to medical
school and it will all be a big waste. The front door opens and the skiers have returned. A
gust of cold air makes it all the way across the living room and blows over us. It feels good,
and I realize that I am being roasted like Nells turkey by the fire here. What time is
dinner? I ask Sharon.
Seven, but last night we had drinks in here first. Mark had just told his mom and dad,
and they werent exactly throwing their arms around me. I mean, they were nice, you know,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
127
how people can be nice but be mean at the same time? I mean, youd think I got pregnant all
by myself and Mark had nothing to do with it
Im glad when Clare comes in. Shes wearing a funny peaked green cap with a big tassel
hanging off it and an ugly yellow skiing sweater over blue jeans. Shes flushed from the cold
and smiling. Her hair is wet and I see as she walks ebulliently across the enormous Persian
carpet in her stocking feet toward me that she does belong here, shes not an aberration, she
has simply chosen another kind of life, and Im glad. I stand up and she throws her arms
around me and then just as quickly she turns to Sharon and says, I just heard!
Congratulations! and Clare embraces Sharon, who looks at me over Clares shoulder,
startled but smiling. Later Sharon tells me, I think youve got the only nice one. I shake my
head but I know what she means.
CLARE: Theres an hour before dinner and no one will notice if were gone. Come on, I tell
Henry. Lets go outside. He groans.
Must we?
I want to show you something.
We put on our coats and boots and hats and gloves and tromp through the house and out
the back door. The sky is clear ultramarine blue and the snow over the meadow reflects it
back lighter and the two blues meet in the dark line of trees that is the beginning of the
woods. Its too early for stars but theres an airplane blinking its way across space. I imagine
our house as a tiny dot of light seen from the plane, like a star.
This way. The path to the clearing is under six inches of snow. I think of all the times I
have stomped over bare footprints so no one would see them running down the path toward
the house. Now there are deer tracks, and the prints of a large dog.
The stubble of dead plants under snow, wind, the sound of our boots. The clearing is a
smooth bowl of blue snow; the rock is an island with a mushroom top. This is it.
Henry stands with his hands in his coat pockets. He swivels around, looking. So this is
it, he says. I search his face for a trace of recognition. Nothing. Do you ever have deja vu?
I ask him.
Henry sighs. My whole life is one long deja vu.
We turn and walk over our own tracks, back to the house.
Later:
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
128
I have warned Henry that we dress for dinner on Christmas Eve and so when I meet him
in the hall he is resplendent in a black suit, white shirt, maroon tie with a mother-of-pearl tie
clasp. Goodness, I say. Youve shined your shoes!
I have , he admits. Pathetic, isnt it?
You look perfect; a Nice Young Man.
When in fact, I am the Punk Librarian Deluxe. Parents, beware.
Theyll adore you.
I adore you. Come here. Henry and I stand before the full-length mirror at the top of the
stairs, admiring ourselves. I am wearing a pale green silk strapless dress which belonged to
my grandmother. I have a photograph of her wearing it on New Years Eve, 1941. Shes
laughing. Her lips are dark with lipstick and shes holding a cigarette. The man in the
photograph is her brother Teddy, who was killed in France six months later. Hes laughing,
too. Henry puts his hands on my waist and expresses surprise at all the boning and corsetry
under the silk. I tell him about Grandma. She was smaller than me. It only hurts when I sit
down; the ends of the steel thingies poke into my hips. Henry is kissing my neck when
someone coughs and we spring apart. Mark and Sharon stand in the door of Marks room,
which Mama and Daddy have reluctantly agreed there is no point in their not sharing.
None of that, now, Mark says in his annoyed schoolmarm voice. Havent you learned
anything from the painful example of your elders, boys and girls?
Yes, replies Henry. Be prepared. He pats his pants pocket (which is actually empty)
with a smile and we sail down the stairs as Sharon giggles.
Everyones already had a few drinks when we arrive in the living room. Alicia makes our
private hand signal: Watch out for Mama, shes messed up. Mama is sitting on the couch
looking harmless, her hair all piled up into a chignon, wearing her pearls and her peach
velvet dress with the lace sleeves. She looks pleased when Mark goes over and sits down
next to her, laughs when he makes some little joke for her, and I wonder for a moment if
Alicia is mistaken. But then I see how Daddy is watching Mama and I realize that she must
have said something awful just before we came in. Daddy is standing by the drinks cart and
he turns to me, relieved, and pours me a Coke and hands Mark a beer and a glass. He asks
Sharon and Henry what theyll have. Sharon asks for La Croix. Henry, after pondering for a
moment, asks for Scotch and water. My father mixes drinks with a heavy hand, and his eyes
bug out a little when Henry knocks back the Scotch effortlessly.
Another?
No, thank you. I know by now that Henry would like to simply take the bottle and a
glass and curl up in bed with a book, and that he is refusing seconds because he would then
feel no compunction about thirds and fourths. Sharon hovers at Henrys elbow and I abandon
them, crossing the room to sit by Aunt Dulcie in the window seat.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
129
Oh, child, how lovelyI havent seen that dress since Elizabeth wore it to the party the
Lichts had at the Planetarium. Alicia joins us; she is wearing a navy blue turtleneck with a
tiny hole where the sleeve is separating from the bodice and an old bedraggled kilt with wool
stockings that bag around her ankles like an old ladys. I know shes doing it to bug Daddy,
but still.
Whats wrong with Mama? I ask her.
Alicia shrugs. Shes pissed off about Sharon.
Whats wrong with Sharon? inquires Dulcie, reading our lips. She seems very nice.
Nicer than Mark, if you ask me.
Shes pregnant, I tell Dulcie. Theyre getting married. Mama thinks shes white trash
because shes the first person in her family to go to college.
Dulcie looks at me sharply, and sees that I know what she knows. Lucille, of all people,
ought to be a little understanding of that young girl. Alicia is about to ask Dulcie what she
means when the dinner bell rings and we rise, Pavlovian, and file toward the dining room. I
whisper to Alicia, Is she drunk? and Alicia whispers back, I think she was drinking in her
room before dinner. I squeeze Alicias hand and Henry hangs back and we go into the
dining room and find our places, Daddy and Mama at the head and foot of the table, Dulcie
and Sharon and Mark on one side with Mark next to Mama, and Alicia and Henry and me,
with Alicia next to Daddy. The room is full of candles, and little flowers floating in cut-glass
bowls, and Etta has laid out all the silver and china on Grandmas embroidered tablecloth
from the nuns in Provence. In short, it is Christmas Eve, exactly like every Christmas Eve I
can remember, except that Henry is at my side sheepishly bowing his head as my father says
grace.
Heavenly Father, we give thanks on this holy night for your mercy and for your
benevolence, for another year of health and happiness, for the comfort of family, and for new
friends. We thank you for sending your Son to guide us and redeem us in the form of a
helpless infant, and we thank you for the baby Mark and Sharon will be bringing into our
family. We beg to be more perfect in our love and patience with each other. Amen. Uh-oh, I
think. Now hes done it. I dart a glance at Mama and she is seething. You would never know
it if you didnt know Mama: she is very still, and she stares at her plate. The kitchen door
opens and Etta comes in with the soup and sets a small bowl in front of each of us. I catch
Marks eye and he inclines his head slightly toward Mama and raises his eyebrows and I just
nod a tiny nod. He asks her a question about this years apple harvest, and she answers.
Alicia and I relax a little bit. Sharon is watching me and I wink at her. The soup is chestnut
and parsnip, which seems like a bad idea until you taste Nells. Wow, Henry says, and we
all laugh, and eat up our soup. Etta clears away the soup bowls and Nell brings in the turkey.
It is golden and steaming and huge, and we all applaud enthusiastically, as we do every year.
Nell beams and says, Well, now as she does every year. Oh, Nell, its perfect, my mother
says with tears in her eyes. Nell looks at her sharply and then at Daddy, and says, Thank
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
130
you, Miz Lucille. Etta serves us stuffing, glazed carrots, mashed potatoes, and lemon curd,
and we pass our plates to Daddy, who heaps them with turkey. I watch Henry as he takes his
first bite of Nells turkey: surprise, then bliss. I have seen my future, he announces, and I
stiffen. I am going to give up librarianing and come and live in your kitchen and worship at
Nells feet. Or perhaps I will just marry her.
Youre too late, says Mark. Nell is already married.
Oh, well. It will have to be her feet, then. Why dont all of you weigh 300 pounds?
Im working on it, my father says, patting his paunch.
Im going to weigh 300 pounds when Im old and I dont have to drag my cello around
anymore, Alicia tells Henry. Im going to live in Paris and eat nothing but chocolate and
Im going to smoke cigars and shoot heroin and listen to nothing but Jimi Hendrix and the
Doors. Right, Mama?
Ill join you, Mama says grandly. But I would rather listen to Johnny Mathis.
If you shoot heroin you wont want to eat much of anything, Henry informs Alicia, who
regards him speculatively. Try marijuana instead. Daddy frowns. Mark changes the
subject: I heard on the radio that its supposed to snow eight inches tonight.
Eight! we chorus.
Im dreaming of a white Christmas..., Sharon ventures without conviction.
I hope it doesnt all dump on us while were in church, Alicia says grumpily. I get so
sleepy after Mass. We chatter on about snowstorms we have known. Dulcie tells about
being caught in the Big Blizzard of 1967, in Chicago. I had to leave my car on Lake Shore
Drive and walk all the way from Adams to Belmont.
I got stuck in that one, says Henry. I almost froze; I ended up in the rectory of the
Fourth Presbyterian Church on Michigan Avenue.
How old were you? asks Daddy, and Henry hesitates and replies, Three. He glances
at me and I realize hes talking about an experience he had while time traveling and he adds,
I was with my father. It seems transparently obvious to me that hes lying but no one
seems to notice. Etta comes in and clears our dishes and sets out dessert plates. After a slight
delay Nell comes in with the flaming plum pudding. Oompa! says Henry. She sets the
pudding down in front of Mama, and the flames turn Mamas pale hair copper red, like mine,
for a moment before they die out. Daddy opens the champagne (under a dish towel, so the
cork wont put out anybodys eyeball). We all pass our glasses to him and he fills them and
we pass them back. Mama cuts thin slices of plum pudding and Etta serves everyone. There
are two extra glasses, one for Etta and one for Nell, and we all stand up for the toasts.
My father begins: To family.
To Nell and Etta, who are like family, who work so hard and make our home and have
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
131
so many talents, my mother says, breathless and soft.
To peace and justice, says Dulcie.
To family, says Etta.
To beginnings  says Mark, toasting Sharon.
To chance she replies.
Its my turn. I look at Henry. To happiness. To here and now.
Henry gravely replies, To world enough and time, and my heart skips and I wonder how
he knows, but then I realize that Marvells one of his favorite poets and hes not referring to
anything but the future.
To snow and Jesus and Mama and Daddy and catgut and sugar and my new red
Converse High Tops, says Alicia, and we all laugh.
To love, says Nell, looking right at me, smiling her vast smile. And to Morton
Thompson, inventor of the best eatin turkey on the Planet Earth.
HENRY: All through dinner Lucille has been careening wildly from sadness to elation to
despair. Her entire family has been carefully navigating her mood, driving her into neutral
territory again and again, buffering her, protecting her. But as we sit down and begin to eat
dessert, she breaks down and sobs silently, her shoulders shaking, her head turned away as
though shes going to tuck it under her wing like a sleeping bird. At first I am the only person
who notices this, and I sit, horrified, unsure what to do. Then Philip sees her, and then the
whole table falls quiet. Hes on his feet, by her side. Lucy? he whispers. Lucy, what is
it? Clare hurries to her, saying Come on, Mama, its okay, Mama... Lucille is shaking her
head, No, no, no, and wringing her hands. Philip backs off; Clare says, Hush, and Lucille
is speaking urgently but not very clearly: I hear a rush of unintelligableness, then All
wrong, and then Ruin his chances, and finally I am just utterly disregarded in this
family, and Hypocritical, and then sobs. To my surprise its Great Aunt Dulcie who
breaks the stunned stillness. Child, if anybodys a hypocrite here its you. You did the exact
same thing and I dont see that it ruined Philips chances one bit. Improved them, if you ask
me. Lucille stops crying and looks at her aunt, shocked into silence. Mark looks at his
father, who nods, once, and then at Sharon, who is smiling as though shes won at bingo. I
look at Clare, who doesnt seem particularly astonished, and I wonder how she knew if Mark
didnt, and I wonder what else she knows that she hasnt mentioned, and then it is borne in
on me that Clare knows everything, our future, our past, everything, and I shiver in the warm
room. Etta brings coffee. We dont linger over it.
CLARE: Etta and I have put Mama to bed. She kept apologizing, the way she always does,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
132
and trying to convince us that she was well enough to go to Mass, but we finally got her to
lie down and almost immediately she was asleep. Etta says that she will stay home in case
Mama wakes up, and I tell her not to be silly, Ill stay, but Etta is obstinate and so I leave her
sitting by the bed, reading St. Matthew. I walk down the hall and peek into Henrys room,
but its dark. When I open my door I find Henry supine on my bed reading A Wrinkle in
Time. I lock the door and join him on the bed.
Whats wrong with your mom? he asks as I carefully arrange myself next to him, trying
not to get stabbed by my dress.
Shes manic-depressive.
Has she always been?
She was better when I was little. She had a baby that died, when I was seven, and that
was bad. She tried to kill herself. I found her. I remember the blood, everywhere, the
bathtub full of bloody water, the towels soaked with it. Screaming for help and nobody was
home. Henry doesnt say anything, and I crane my neck and he is staring at the ceiling.
Clare, he finally says.
What?
How come you didnt tell me? I mean, theres kind of a lot of stuff going on with your
family that it would have been good to know ahead of time.
But you knew.... I trail off. He didnt know. How could he know? Im sorry. Its just
I told you when it happened, and I forget that now is before then, and so I think you know all
about it...
Henry pauses, and then says, Well, Ive sort of emptied the bag, as far as my family is
concerned; all the closets and skeletons have been displayed for your inspection, and I was
just surprised...I dont know.
But you havent introduced me to him. Im dying to meet Henrys dad, but Ive been
afraid to bring it up.
No. I havent.
Are you going to?
Eventually.
When? I expect Henry to tell me Im pushing my luck, like he always used to when I
asked too many questions, but instead he sits up and swings his legs off the side of the bed.
The back of his shirt is all wrinkled.
I dont know, Clare. When I can stand it, I guess.
I hear footsteps outside the door that stop, and the doorknob jiggles back and forth.
Clare? my father says. Why is the door locked? I get up and open the door. Daddy opens
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
133
his mouth and then sees Henry and beckons me into the hall.
Clare, you know your mother and I dont approve of you inviting your friend into your
bedroom, he says quietly. There are plenty of rooms in this house
We were just talking
You can talk in the living room.
I was telling him about Mama and I didnt want to talk about it in the living room,
okay?
Honey, I really dont think its necessary to tell him about your mother
After the performance she just gave what am I supposed to do? Henry can see for
himself that shes wacko, he isnt stupid my voice is rising and Alicia opens her door and
puts her finger to her lips.
Your mother is not wacko, my father says sternly.
Yeah, she is, Alicia affirms, joining the fray.
Now stay out of this
The hell I will
Alicia! Daddys face is dark red and his eyes are protruding and his voice is very loud.
Etta opens Mamas door and looks at the three of us with exasperation. Go downstairs, if
you want to yell, she hisses, and closes the door. We look at each other, abashed.
Later, I tell Daddy. Give me a hard time later. Henry has been sitting on my bed this
whole time, trying to pretend hes not here. Come on, Henry. Lets go sit in some other
room. Henry, docile as a small rebuked boy, stands and follows me downstairs. Alicia
galumphs after us. At the bottom of the stairs I look up and see Daddy looking down at us
helplessly. He turns and walks over to Mamas door and knocks.
Hey, lets watch Its a Wonderful Life Alicia says, looking at her watch. Its on
Channel 60 in five minutes.
Again? Havent you seen it, like, two hundred times already? Alicia has a thing for
Jimmy Stewart.
Ive never seen it, says Henry.
Alicia affects shock. Never? How come?
I dont have a television.
Now Alicia really is shocked. Did yours break or something?
Henry laughs. No. I just hate them. They give me headaches. They make him time
travel. Its the flickering quality of the picture.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
134
Alicia is disappointed. So you dont want to watch?
Henry glances at me; I dont mind. Sure, I say. For a while. We wont see the end,
though; we have to get ready for Mass.
We troop into the TV room, which is off the living room. Alicia turns on the set. A choir
is singing It Came Upon the Midnight Clear. Ugh, she sneers. Look at those bad yellow
plastic robes. They look like rain ponchos. She plops down on the floor and Henry sits on
the couch. I sit down next to him. Ever since we arrived I have been worrying constantly
about how to behave in front of my various family members in terms of Henry. How close
should I sit? If Alicia werent here I would lie down on the couch, put my head on Henrys
lap. Henry solves my problem by scooting closer and putting his arm around me. Its kind of
a self-conscious arm: we would never sit this way in any other context. Of course, we never
watch TV together. Maybe this is how we would sit if we ever watched TV. The choir
disappears and a slew of commercials comes on. McDonalds, a local Buick dealership,
Pillsbury, Red Lobster: they all wish us a Merry Christmas. I look at Henry, who has an
expression of blank amazement on his face.
What? I ask him softly.
The speed. They jump cut every couple seconds; Im going to be ill. Henry rubs his
eyes with his fingers. I think Ill just go read for a while. He gets up and walks out of the
room, and in a minute I hear his feet on the stairs. I offer up a quick prayer: Please, God, let
Henry not time travel, especially not when were about to go to church and I wont be able to
explain. Alicia scrambles onto the couch as the opening credits appear on the screen.
He didnt last long, she observes.
He gets these really bad headaches. The kind where you have to lie in the dark and not
move and if anybody says boo your brain explodes.
Oh. James Stewart is flashing a bunch of travel brochures, but his departure is cut short
by the necessity of attending a dance. Hes really cute.
Jimmy Stewart?
Him too. I meant your guy. Henry.
I grin. I am as proud as if I had made Henry myself. Yeah.
Donna Reed is smiling radiantly at Jimmy Stewart across a crowded room. Now they are
dancing, and Jimmy Stewarts rival has turned the switch that causes the dance floor to open
over a swimming pool. Mama really likes him.
Hallelujah. Donna and Jimmy dance backwards into the pool; soon people in evening
clothes are diving in after them as the band continues playing.
Nell and Etta approve, also.
Great. Now we just have to get through the next thirty-six hours without ruining the
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
135
good first impression.
How hard can that be? Unlessno, you wouldnt be that dumb...
Alicia looks over at me dubiously. Would you?
Of course not.
Of course not, she echoes. God, I cant believe Mark. What a stupid fuck. Jimmy and
Donna are singing Buffalo Girls, wont you come out tonight while walking down the streets
of Bedford Falls resplendent in football uniform and bathrobe, respectively. You should
have been here yesterday. I thought Daddy was going to have a coronary right in front of the
Christmas tree. I was imagining him crashing into it and the tree falling on him and the
paramedics having to heave all the ornaments and presents off him before they could do
CPR... Jimmy offers Donna the moon, and Donna accepts.
I thought you learned CPR in school.
I would be too busy trying to revive Mama. It was bad, Clare. There was a lot of
yelling.
Was Sharon there?
Alicia laughs grimly. Are you kidding? Sharon and I were in here trying to chat politely,
you know, and Mark and the parentals were in the living room screaming at each other. After
a while we just sat here and listened.
Alicia and I exchange a look that just means So what else is new? We have spent our lives
listening to our parents yelling, at each other, at us. Sometimes I feel like if I have to watch
Mama cry one more time Im going to leave forever and never come back. Right now I want
to grab Henry and drive back to Chicago, where no one can yell, no one can pretend
everything is okay and nothing happened. An irate, paunchy man in an undershirt yells at
James Stewart to stop talking Donna Reed to death and just kiss her. I couldnt agree more,
but he doesnt. Instead he steps on her robe and she walks obliviously out of it, and the next
thing you know shes hiding naked in a large hydrangea bush.
A commercial for Pizza Hut comes on and Alicia turns off the sound. Um, Clare?
Yeah?
Has Henry ever been here before?
Uh-oh. No, I dont think so, why?
She shifts uneasily and looks away for a second. Youre gonna think Im nuts.
What?
See, I had this weird thing happen. A long time ago...I was, like, about twelve, and I was
supposed to be practicing, but then I remembered that I didnt have a clean shirt for this
audition or something, and Etta and everybody were out someplace and Mark was supposed
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
136
to be baby-sitting but he was in his room doing bongs or whatever.... Anyway, so I went
downstairs, to the laundry room, and I was looking for my shirt, and I heard this noise, you
know, like the door at the south end of the basement, the one that goes into the room with all
the bicycles, that sort of whoosh noise? So I thought it was Peter, right? So I was standing in
the door of the laundry room, sort of listening, and the door to the bicycle room opens and
Clare, you wont believe this, it was this totally naked guy who looked just like Henry.
When I start laughing it sounds fake. Oh, come on.
Alicia grins. See, I knew you would think it was nuts. But I swear, it really happened. So
this guy just looks a little surprised, you know, I mean Im standing there with my mouth
hanging open and wondering if this naked guy is going to, you know, rape me or kill me or
something, and he just looks at me and goes, Oh, hi, Alicia, and walks into the Reading
Room and shuts the door.
Huh?
So I run upstairs, and Im banging on Marks door and hes telling me to buzz off, and so
finally I get him to open the door and hes so stoned that it takes a while before he gets what
Im talking about and then, of course, he doesnt believe me but finally I get him to come
downstairs and he knocks on the Reading Room door and we are both really scared, its like
Nancy Drew, you know, where youre thinking, Those girls are really dumb, they should
just call the police, but nothing happens, and then Mark opens the door and theres nobody
there, and he is mad at me, for, like, making it up, but then we think the man went upstairs,
so we both go and sit in the kitchen next to the phone with Nells big carving knife on the
counter.
How come you never told me about this?
Well, by the time you all got home I felt kind of stupid, and I knew that Daddy
especially would think it was a big deal, and nothing really happened.. .but it wasnt funny,
either, and I didnt feel like talking about it. Alicia laughs. I asked Grandma once if there
were any ghosts in the house, but she said there werent any she knew of.
And this guy, or ghost, looked like Henry?
Yeah! I swear, Clare, I almost died when you guys came in and I saw him, I mean, hes
the guy! Even his voice is the same. Well, the one I saw in the basement had shorter hair, and
he was older, maybe around forty...
But if that guy was forty, and it was five years agoHenry is only twenty-eight, so he
would have been twenty-three then, Alicia.
Oh. Huh. But Clare, its too weirddoes he have a brother?
No. His dad doesnt look much like him.
Maybe it was, you know, astral projection or something.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
137
Time travel, I offer, smiling.
Oh, yeah, right. God, how bizarre. The TV screen is dark for a moment, then we are
back with Donna in her hydrangea bush and Jimmy Stewart walking around it with her
bathrobe draped over one arm. Hes teasing her, telling her hes going to sell tickets to see
her. The cad, I think, even as I blush remembering worse things Ive said and done to Henry
vis a vis the issue of clothing/nakedness. But then a car rolls up and Jimmy Stewart throws
Donna her bathrobe. Your fathers had a stroke! says someone in the car, and off he goes
with hardly a backward glance, as Donna Reed stands bereft in her foliage. My eyes tear up.
Jeez, Clare, its okay, hell be back, Alicia reminds me. I smile, and we settle in to watch
Mr. Potter taunting poor Jimmy Stewart into giving up college and running a doomed
savings and loan. Bastard, Alicia says. Bastard, I agree.
HENRY: As we walk out of the cold night air into the warmth and light of the church my guts
are churning. Ive never been to a Catholic Mass. The last time I attended any sort of
religious service was my moms funeral. I am holding on to Clares arm like a blind man as
she leads us up the central aisle, and we file into an empty pew. Clare and her family kneel
on the cushioned kneelers and I sit, as Clare has told me to. We are early. Alicia has
disappeared, and Nell is sitting behind us with her husband and their son, who is on leave
from the Navy. Dulcie sits with a contemporary of hers. Clare, Mark, Sharon, and Philip
kneel side by side in varying attitudes: Clare is self-conscious, Mark perfunctory, Sharon
calm and absorbed, Philip exhausted. The church is full of poinsettias. It smells like wax and
wet coats. Theres an elaborate stable scene with Mary and Joseph and their entourage to the
right of the altar. People are filing in, choosing seats, greeting each other. Clare slides onto
the seat next to me, and Mark and Philip follow suit; Sharon remains on her knees for a few
more minutes and then we are all sitting quietly in a row, waiting. A man in a suit walks onto
the stagealtar, whateverand tests the microphones that are attached to the little reading
stands, then disappears into the back again. There are many more people now, its crowded.
Alicia and two other women and a man appear stage left, carrying their instruments. The
blond woman is a violinist and the mousy brown-haired woman is the viola player; the man,
who is so elderly that he stoops and shuffles, is another violinist. They are all wearing black.
They sit in their folding chairs, turn on the lights over their music stands, rattle their sheet
music, plink at various strings, and look at each other, for consensus. People are suddenly
quiet and into this quiet comes a long, slow, low note that fills the space, that connects to no
known piece of music but simply exists, sustains. Alicia is bowing as slowly as it is possible
for a human to bow, and the sound she is producing seems to emerge from nowhere, seems
to originate between my ears, resonates through my skull like fingers stroking my brain.
Then she stops. The silence that follows is brief but absolute. Then all four musicians surge
into action. After the simplicity of that single note their music is dissonant, modern and
jarring and I think Bartok? but then I resolve what I am hearing and realize that they are
playing Silent Night. I cant figure out why it sounds so weird until I see the blond violinist
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
138
kick Alicias chair and after a beat the piece comes into focus. Clare glances over at me and
smiles. Everyone in the church relaxes. Silent Night gives way to a hymn I dont recognize.
Everyone stands. They turn toward the back of the church, and the priest walks up the central
aisle with a large retinue of small boys and a few men in suits. They solemnly march to the
front of the church and take up their positions. The music abruptly stops. Oh, no, I think,
what now? Clare takes my hand, and we stand together, in the crowd, and if there is a God,
then God, let me just stand here quietly and inconspicuously, here and now, here and now.
CLARE: Henry looks as though hes about to pass out. Dear God, please dont let him
disappear now. Father Compton is welcoming us in his radio announcer voice. I reach into
Henrys coat pocket, push my fingers through the hole at the bottom, find his cock, and
squeeze. He jumps as though Ive administered an electric shock. The Lord be with you,
says Father Compton. And also with you, we all reply serenely. The same, everything the
same. And yet, here we are, at last, for anyone to see. I can feel Helens eyes boring into my
back. Ruth is sitting five rows behind us, with her brother and parents. Nancy, Laura, Mary
Christina, Patty, Dave, and Chris, and even Jason Everleigh; it seems like everyone I went to
school with is here tonight. I look over at Henry, who is oblivious to all this. He is sweating.
He glances at me, raises one eyebrow. The Mass proceeds. The readings, the Kyrie, Peace be
with you: and also with you. We all stand for the gospel, Luke, Chapter 2. Everyone in the
Roman Empire, traveling to their home towns, to be taxed, Joseph and Mary, great with
child, the birth, miraculous, humble. The swaddling clothes, the manger. The logic of it has
always escaped me, but the beauty of the thing is undeniable. The shepherds, abiding in the
field. The angel: Fear not: for, behold,
I bring you good tidings of great joy...Henry is jiggling his leg in a very distracting way.
He has his eyes closed and he is biting his lip. Multitudes of angels. Father Compton intones,
 But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart Amen, we say, and sit
down for the sermon. Henry leans over and whispers, Where is the restroom?
Through that door, I tell him, pointing at the door Alicia and Frank and the others came
in through. How do I get there?
Walk to the back of the church and then down the side aisle.
If I dont come back
You have to come back. As Father Compton says, On this most joyous of nights...
Henry stands and walks quickly away. Fathers eyes follow him as he walks back and over
and up to the door. I watch as he slips out the door and it swings shut behind him.
HENRY: Im standing in what appears to be the hallway of an elementary school. Dont
panic, I repeat to myself. No one can see you. Hide somewhere. I look around, wildly, and
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
139
theres a door: BOYS. I open it, and Im in a miniature mens room, brown tile, all the fixtures
tiny and low to the ground, radiator blasting, intensifying the smell of institutional soap. I
open the window a few inches and stick my face above the crack. There are evergreen trees
blocking any view there might have been, and so the cold air I am sucking in tastes of pine.
After a few minutes I feel less tenuous. I lie down on the tile, curled up, knees to chin. Here I
am. Solid.
Now. Here on this brown tile floor. It seems like such a small thing to ask. Continuity.
Surely, if there is a God, he wants us to be good, and it would be unreasonable to expect
anyone to be good without incentives, and Clare is very, very good, and she even believes in
God, and why would he decide to embarrass her in front of all those peopleI open my
eyes. All the tiny porcelain fixtures have iridescent auras, sky blue and green and purple, and
I resign myself to going, theres no stopping now, and I am shaking, No! but Im gone.
CLARE: Father finishes his sermon, which is about world peace, and Daddy leans across
Sharon and Mark and whispers, Is your friend sick?
Yes, I whisper back, he has a headache, and sometimes they make him nauseous.
Should I go see if I can help?
No! Hell be okay. Daddy doesnt seem convinced, but he stays in his seat. Father is
blessing the host. I try to suppress my urge to run out and find Henry myself. The first pews
stand for communion. Alicia is playing Bachs cello suite no. 2. It is sad and lovely. Come
back, Henry. Come back.
HENRY: Im in my apartment in Chicago. Its dark, and Im on my knees in the living room. I
stagger up, and whack my elbow on the bookshelves. Fuck! I cant believe this. I cant
even get through one day with Clares family and Ive been sucked up and spit out into my
own fucking apartment like a fucking pinball
Hey. I turn and there I am, sleepily sitting up, on the sofa bed.
Whats the date? I demand.
December 28, 1991. Four days from now.
I sit down on the bed. I cant stand it.
Relax. Youll be back in a few minutes. Nobody will notice. Youll be perfectly okay for
the rest of the visit.
Yeah?
Yeah. Stop whining, my self says, imitating Dad perfectly. I want to deck him, but what
would be the point? Theres music playing softly in the background.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
140
Is that Bach?
Huh? Oh, yeah, its in your head. Its Alicia.
Thats odd. Oh! I run for the bathroom, and almost make it.
CLARE: The last few people are receiving communion when Henry walks in the door, a little
pale, but walking. He walks back and up the aisle and squeezes in next to me. The Mass is
ended, go in peace, says Father Compton. Amen, we respond. The altar boys assemble
together like a school of fish around Father, and they proceed jauntily up the aisle and we all
file out after them. I hear Sharon ask Henry if hes okay, but I dont catch his reply because
Helen and Ruth have intercepted us and I am introducing Henry.
Helen simpers. But weve met before!
Henry looks at me, alarmed. I shake my head at Helen, who smirks. Well, maybe not,
she says. Nice to meet youHenry. Ruth shyly offers Henry her hand. To my surprise he
holds it for a moment and then says, Hello, Ruth, before I have introduced her, but as far as
I can tell she doesnt recognize him. Laura joins us just as Alicia comes up bumping her cello
case through the crowd. Come to my house tomorrow, Laura invites. My parents are
leaving for the Bahamas at four. We all agree enthusiastically; every year Lauras parents
go someplace tropical the minute all the presents have been opened, and every year we flock
over there as soon as their car disappears around the driveway. We part with a chorus of
Merry Christmas! and as we emerge through the side door of the church into the parking
lot Alicia says, Ugh, I knew it! Theres deep new snow everywhere, the world has been
remade white. I stand still and look at the trees and cars and across the street toward the lake,
which is crashing, invisible, on the beach far below the church on the bluff. Henry stands
with me, waiting. Mark says, Come on, Clare, and I do.
HENRY: Its about 1:30 in the morning when we walk in the door of Meadowlark House. All
the way home Philip scolded Alicia for her mistake at the beginning of Silent Night, and
she sat quietly, looking out the window at the dark houses and trees. Now everyone goes
upstairs to their rooms after saying Merry Christmas about fifty more times except Alicia
and Clare, who disappear into a room at the end of the first floor hall. I wonder what to do
with myself, and on an impulse I follow them.
a total prick, Alicia is saying as I stick my head in the door. The room is dominated
by an enormous pool table which is bathed in the brilliant glare of the lamp suspended over
it. Clare is racking up the balls as Alicia paces back and forth in the shadows at the edge of
the pool of light.
Well, if you deliberately try to piss him off and he gets pissed off, I dont see why youre
upset, Clare says.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
141
Hes just so smug, Alicia says, punching the air with her fists. I cough. They both jump
and then Clare says, Oh, Henry, thank God, I thought you were Daddy.
Wanna play? Alicia asks me.
No, Ill just watch. There is a tall stool by the table, and I sit on it.
Clare hands Alicia a cue. Alicia chalks it and then breaks, sharply. Two stripes fall into
corner pockets. Alicia sinks two more before missing, just barely, a combo bank shot. Uhoh,
says Clare. Im in trouble. Clare drops an easy solid, the 2 ball, which was poised on
the edge of a corner pocket. On her next shot she sends the cue ball into the hole after the 3,
and Alicia fishes out both balls and lines up her shot. She runs the stripes without further
ado. Eight ball, side pocket, Alicia calls, and that is that. Ouch, sighs Clare. Sure you
dont want to play? She offers me her cue.
Come on, Henry, say Alicia. Hey, do either of you want anything to drink?
No, Clare says.
What have you got? I ask. Alicia snaps on a light and a beautiful old bar appears at the
far end of the room. Alicia and I huddle behind it and lo, there is just about everything I can
imagine in the way of alcohol. Alicia mixes herself a rum and Coke. I hesitate before such
riches, but finally pour myself a stiff whiskey. Clare decides to have something after all, and
as shes cracking the miniature tray of ice cubes into a glass for her Kahlua the door opens
and we all freeze.
Its Mark. Wheres Sharon? Clare asks him. Lock that, commands Alicia.
He turns the lock and walks behind the bar. Sharon is sleeping, he says, pulling a
Heineken out of the tiny fridge. He uncaps it and saunters over to the table. Whos
playing?
Alicia and Henry, says Clare.
Hmm. Has he been warned?
Shut up, Mark, Alicia says.
Shes Jackie Gleason in disguise, Mark assures me.
I turn to Alicia. Let the games begin. Clare racks again. Alicia gets the break. The
whiskey has coated all my synapses, and everything is sharp and clear. The balls explode like
fireworks and blossom into a new pattern. The 13 teeters on the edge of a corner pocket and
then falls. Stripes again, Alicia says. She sinks the 15, the 12, and the 9 before a bad leave
forces her to try an unmakable two-rail shot.
Clare is standing just at the edge of the light, so that her face is in shadow but her body
floats out of the blackness, her arms folded across her chest. I turn my attention to the table.
Its been a while. I sink the 2, 3, and 6 easily, and then look for something else to work with.
The 1 is smack in front of the corner pocket at the opposite end of the table, and I send the
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
142
cue ball into the 7 which drops the 1.1 send the 4 into a side pocket with a bank shot and get
the 5 in the back corner with a lucky carom. Its just slop, but Alicia whistles anyway. The 7
goes down without mishap. Eight in the corner I indicate with my cue, and in it goes. A
sigh escapes around the table.
Oh, that was beautiful, says Alicia. Do it again. Clare is smiling in the dark.
Not your usual, Mark says to Alicia.
Im too tired to concentrate. And too pissed off.
Because of Dad?
Yeah.
Well, if you poke him, hes going to poke back.
Alicia pouts. Anybody can make an honest mistake.
It sounded like Terry Riley for a minute there, I tell Alicia.
She smiles. It was Terry Riley. It was from Salome Dances for Peace!
Clare laughs. How did Salome get into Silent Night?
Well, you know, John the Baptist, I figured that was enough of a connection, and if you
transpose that first violin part down an octave, it sounds pretty good, you know, la la la,
LA...
But you cant blame him for getting mad, says Mark. I mean, he knows that you
wouldnt play something that sounded like that by accident.
I pour myself a second drink.
What did Frank say? Clare asks.
Oh, he dug it. He was, like, trying to figure out how to make a whole new piece out of it,
you know, like Silent Night meets Stravinsky. I mean, Frank is eighty-seven, he doesnt care
if I fuck around as long as hes amused. Arabella and Ashley were pretty snitty about it,
though.
Well, it isnt very professional, says Mark.
Who cares? This is just St. Basils, you know? Alicia looks at me. What do you
think?
I hesitate. I dont really care, I say finally. But if my dad heard you do that, hed be
very angry.
Really? Why?
He has this idea that every piece of music should be treated with respect, even if it isnt
something he likes much. I mean, he doesnt like Tchaikovsky, or Strauss, but he will play
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
143
them very seriously. Thats why hes great; he plays everything as though hes in love with
it.
Oh. Alicia walks behind the bar, mixes herself another drink, thinks this over. Well,
youre lucky to have a great dad who loves something besides money.
Im standing behind Clare, running my fingers up her spine in the dark. She puts her hand
behind her back and I clasp it. I dont think you would say that if you knew my family at all.
Besides, your dad seems to care about you very much.
No  she shakes her head. He just wants me to be perfect in front of his friends. He
doesnt care at all. Alicia racks the balls and swivels them into position. Who wants to
play?
Ill play, Mark says. Henry?
Sure. Mark and I chalk our cues and face each other across the table.
I break. The 4 and the 15 go down. Solids, I call, seeing the 2 near the corner. I sink it,
and then miss the 3 altogether. Im getting tired, and my coordination is softening from the
whiskies. Mark plays with determination but no flair, and sinks the 10 and the 11. We soldier
on, and soon I have sunk all the solids. Marks 13 is parked on the lip of a corner pocket. 8
ball, I say pointing at it. You know, you cant drop Marks ball or youll lose, says Alicia.
S okay, I tell her. I launch the cue ball gently across the table, and it kisses the 8 ball
lovingly and sends it smooth and easy toward the 13, and it seems to almost detour around
the 13 as though on rails, and plops decorously into the hole, and Clare laughs, but then the
13 teeters, and falls.
Oh, well, I say. Easy come, easy go.
Good game, says Mark.
God, whered you learn to play like that? Alicia asks.
It was one of the things I learned in college. Along with drinking, English and German
poetry, and drugs. We put away the cues and pick up the glasses and bottles.
What was your major? Mark unlocks the door and we all walk together down the hall
toward the kitchen.
English lit.
How come not music? Alicia balances her glass and Clares in one hand as she pushes
open the dining room door.
I laugh. You wouldnt believe how unmusical I am. My parents were sure theyd brought
home the wrong kid from the hospital.
That must have been a drag, says Mark. At least Dads not pushing you to be a
lawyer he says to Alicia. We enter the kitchen and Clare flips on the light.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
144
Hes not pushing you either she retorts. You love it.
Well, thats what I mean. Hes not making any of us do something we dont want to do.
Was it a drag? Alicia asks me. I would have been lapping it up.
Well, before my mom died, everything was great. After that, everything was terrible. If I
had been a violin prodigy, maybe.. .I dunno. I look at Clare, and shrug. Anyway, Dad and I
dont get along. At all.
How come?
Clare says, Bedtime. She means, Enough already. Alicia is waiting for an answer.
I turn my face to her. Have you ever seen a picture of my mom? She nods. I look like
her.
So? Alicia washes the glasses under the tap. Clare dries.
So, he cant stand to look at me. I mean, thats just one reason among many.
But
Alicia Clare is trying, but Alicia is unstoppable.
But hes your dad.
I smile. The things you do to annoy your dad are small beer compared with the things
my dad and I have done to each other.
Like what?
Like the numerous times he has locked me out of our apartment, in all kinds of weather.
Like the time I threw his car keys into the river. That kind of thing.
Whydja do that?
I didnt want him to smash up the car, and he was drunk.
Alicia, Mark, and Clare all look at me and nod. They understand perfectly.
Bedtime, says Alicia, and we all leave the kitchen and go to our rooms without another
word, except, Good night.
CLARE: Its 3:14 a.m. according to my alarm clock and I am just getting warm in my cold
bed when the door opens and Henry comes in very quietly. I pull back the covers and he
hops in. The bed squeaks as we arrange ourselves.
Hi I whisper.
Hi Henry whispers back.
This isnt a good idea.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
145
It was very cold in my room.
Oh. Henry touches my cheek, and I have to stifle a shriek. His fingers are icy. I rub
them between my palms. Henry burrows deeper into the covers. I press against him, trying to
get warm again. Are you wearing socks? he asks softly.
Yes. He reaches down and pulls them off my feet. After a few minutes and a lot of
squeaking and Shhh! we are both naked.
Where did you go, when you left church?
My apartment. For about five minutes, four days from now.
Why?
Tired. Tense, I guess
No, why there?
Dunno. Sort of a default mechanism. The time travel air traffic controllers thought I
would look good there, maybe. Henry buries his hand in my hair.
Its getting lighter outside. Merry Christmas, I whisper. Henry doesnt answer, and I lie
awake in his arms thinking about multitudes of angels, listening to his measured breath, and
pondering in my heart.
HENRY: In the early hours of the morning I get up to take a leak and as I stand in Clares
bathroom sleepily urinating by the illumination of the Tinkerbell nightlight I hear a girls
voice say Clare? and before I can figure out where this voice is coming from a door that I
thought was a closet opens and I find myself standing stark naked in front of Alicia. Oh,
she whispers as I belatedly grab a towel and cover myself. Oh, hi, Alicia, I whisper, and
we both grin. She disappears back into her room as abruptly as she came in.
CLARE: Im dozing, listening to the house waking up. Nell is down in the kitchen singing and
rattling the pans. Someone walks down the hall, past my door. I look over and Henry is still
deep in sleep, and I suddenly realize that I have got to get him out of here without anyone
seeing. I extricate myself from Henry and the blankets and climb out of bed carefully. I pick
my nightgown up off the floor and Im just pulling it on over my head when Etta says,
Clare! Rise and shine, its Christmas! and sticks her head in the door. I hear Alicia calling
Etta and as I poke my head out of the nightgown I see Etta turn away to answer Alicia and I
turn to the bed and Henry is not there. His pajama bottoms are lying on the rug and I kick
them under the bed. Etta walks into my room in her yellow bathrobe with her braids trailing
over her shoulders. I say Merry Christmas! and she is telling me something about Mama,
but Im having trouble listening because Im imagining Henry materializing in front of Etta.
Clare? Etta is peering at me with concern.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
146
Huh? Oh, sorry. Im still asleep, I guess.
Theres coffee downstairs. Etta is making the bed. She looks puzzled.
Ill do that, Etta. You go on down. Etta walks to the other side of the bed. Mama sticks
her head in the door. She looks beautiful, serene after last nights storm. Merry Christmas,
honey.
I walk to her, kiss her cheek lightly. Merry Christmas, Mama. Its so hard to stay mad at
her when she is my familiar, lovely Mama.
Etta, will you come down with me? Mama asks. Etta thwaps the pillows with her hands
and the twin impressions of our heads vanish. She glances at me, raises her eyebrows, but
doesnt say anything.
Etta?
Coming... Etta bustles out after Mama. I shut the door after them and lean against it,
just in time to see Henry roll out from under the bed. He gets up and starts to put his pajamas
on. I lock the door.
Where were you? I whisper.
Under the bed, Henry whispers back, as though this should be obvious.
All the time?
Yeah. For some reason this strikes me as hilarious, and I start to giggle. Henry puts his
hand over my mouth, and soon we are both shaking with laughter, silently.
HENRY: Christmas Day is strangely calm after the high seas of yesterday. We gather around
the tree, self-conscious in our bathrobes and slippers, and presents are opened, and exclaimed
over. After effusive thanks on all sides, we eat breakfast. There is a lull and then we eat
Christmas dinner, with great praise for Nell and the lobsters. Everyone is smiling, wellmannered,
and good-looking. We are a model happy family, an advertisement for the
bourgeoisie. We are everything I always longed for when I sat in the Lucky Wok restaurant
with Dad and Mrs. and Mr. Kim every Christmas Day and tried to pretend I was enjoying
myself while the adults all watched anxiously. But even as we lounge, well-fed, in the living
room after dinner, watching football on television and reading the books we have given each
other and attempting to operate the presents which require batteries and/or assembly, there is
a noticeable strain. It is as though somewhere, in one of the more remote rooms of the house,
a cease-fire has been signed, and now all the parties are endeavoring to honor it, at least until
tomorrow, at least until a new consignment of ammunition comes in. We are all acting,
pretending to be relaxed, impersonating the ideal mother, father, sisters, brother, boyfriend,
fiance. And so it is a relief when Clare looks at her watch, gets up off the couch, and says,
Come on, its time to go over to Lauras.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
147
CLARE: Lauras party is in full swing by the time we arrive. Henry is tense and pale and
heads for the liquor as soon as we get our coats off. I still feel sleepy from the wine we drank
at dinner, so I shake my head when he asks me what I want, and he brings me a Coke. Hes
holding on to his beer as though its ballast. Do not, under any circumstances, leave me to
fend for myself, Henry demands, looking over my shoulder, and before I can even turn my
head Helen is upon us. There is a momentary, embarrassed silence.
So, Henry Helen says, we hear that you are a librarian. But you dont look like a
librarian.
Actually, I am a Calvin Klein underwear model. The librarian thing is just a front.
Ive never seen Helen nonplussed before. I wish I had a camera. She recovers quickly,
though, looks Henry up and down, and smiles. Okay, Clare, you can keep him, she says.
Thats a relief, I tell her. Ive lost the receipt. Laura, Ruth, and Nancy converge on us,
looking determined, and interrogate us: how did we meet, what does Henry do for a living,
where did he go to college, blah, blah, blah. I never expected that when Henry and I finally
appeared in public together it would be simultaneously so nerve-racking and so boring. I tune
in again just as Nancy says, Its so weird that your name is Henry.
Oh? says Henry, Whys that?
Nancy tells him about the slumber party at Mary Christinas, the one where the Ouija
board said that I was going to marry someone named Henry. Henry looks impressed.
Really? he asks me.
Um, yeah. I suddenly have an urgent need to pee. Excuse me, I say, detaching myself
from the group and ignoring Henrys pleading expression. Helen is hot on my heels as I run
upstairs. I have to shut the bathroom door in her face to stop her from following me in.
Open up, Clare, she says, jiggling the door knob. I take my time, pee, wash my hands,
put on fresh lipstick. Clare, Helen grumbles, Im gonna go downstairs and tell your
boyfriend every single hideous thing youve ever done in your life if you dont open this
door immed I swing the door open and Helen almost falls into the room.
All right, Clare Abshire, Helen says menacingly. She closes the door. I sit down on the
side of the bathtub and she leans against the sink, looming over me in her pumps. Fess up.
What is really going on with you and this Henry person? I mean, you just stood there and
told a big fat stack of lies. You didnt meet this guy three months ago, youve known him for
years! Whats the big secret?
I dont really know how to begin. Should I tell Helen the truth? No.
Why not? As far as I know, Helen has only seen Henry once, and he didnt look that
different from how he looks right now. I love Helen. Shes strong, shes crazy, shes hard to
fool. But I know she wouldnt believe me if I said, time travel, Helen. You have to see it to
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
148
believe it.
Okay, I say, gathering my wits. Yeah, IVe known him for a long time.
How long?
Since I was six.
Helens eyes bug out like a cartoon characters. I laugh.
Why.. .how come.. .well, how long have you been dating him?
I dunno. I mean, there was a period of time when things were sort of on the verge, but
nothing was exactly going on, you know; that is, Henry was pretty adamant that he wasnt
going to mess around with a little kid, so I was just kind of hopelessly nuts about him...
Buthow come we never knew about him? I dont see why it all had to be such a hush
hush. You could have told me.
Well, you kind of knew. This is lame, and I know it.
Helen looks hurt. Thats not the same thing as you telling me.
I know. Im sorry.
Hmpf. So what was the deal?
Well, hes eight years older than me.
So what?
So when I was twelve and he was twenty, that was a problem. Not to mention when I
was six and he was forty.
I still dont get it. I mean, I can see you not wanting your parents to know you were
playing Lolita to his Humbert Humbert, but I dont get why you couldnt tell us. We would
have been totally into it. I mean, we spent all this time feeling sorry for you, and worrying
about you, and wondering why you were such a nun Helen shakes her head. And there
you were, screwing Mario the Librarian the whole time
I cant help it, Im blushing. I was not screwing him the whole time.
Oh, come, on.
Really! We waited till I was eighteen. We did it on my birthday.
Even so, Clare, Helen begins, but theres a heavy knock on the bathroom door, and a
deep male voice asks, Are you girls about done in there?
To be continued, Helen hisses at me as we exit the bathroom to the applause of the five
guys standing in line in the hallway.
I find Henry in the kitchen, listening patiently as one of Lauras inexplicable jock friends
babbles on about football. I catch the eye of his blond, button-nosed girlfriend, and she hauls
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
149
him off to get another drink.
Henry says, Look, ClareBaby Punks! I look and hes pointing at Jodie, Lauras
fourteen-year-old sister, and her boyfriend, Bobby Hardgrove. Bobby has a green Mohawk
and the full ripped T-shirt/safety pin getup, and Jodie is trying to look like Lydia Lunch but
instead just looks like a raccoon having a bad hair day. Somehow they seem like theyre at a
Halloween party instead of a Christmas party. They look stranded and defensive. But Henry
is enthusiastic. Wow. How old are they, about twelve?
Fourteen.
Lets see, fourteen, from ninety-one, that makes them...oh my god, they were born in
1977. I feel old. I need another drink. Laura passes through the kitchen holding a tray of
Jell-O shots. Henry takes two and downs them both in rapid succession, then makes a face.
Ugh. How revolting. I laugh. What do you think they listen to? Henry says.
Dunno. Why dont you go over and ask them?
Henry looks alarmed. Oh, I couldnt. Id scare them.
I think youre scared of them.
Well, you may be right. They look so tender and young and green, like baby peas or
something.
Did you ever dress like that?
Henry snorts derisively. What do you think? Of course not. Those children are emulating
British punk. I am an American punk. No, I used to be into more of a Richard Hell kind of
look.
Why dont you go talk to them? They seem lonely
You have to come and introduce us and hold my hand. We venture across the kitchen
with caution, like Levi-Strauss approaching a pair of cannibals. Jodie and Bobby have that
fight or flight look you see on deer on the Nature Channel.
Um, hi, Jodie, Bobby.
Hi, Clare, says Jodie. Ive known Jodie her whole life, but she seems shy all of a
sudden, and I decide that the neo-punk apparel must be Bobbys idea.
You guys looked kind of, um, bored, so I brought Henry over to meet you. He likes your,
um, outfits.
Hi, says Henry, acutely embarrassed. I was just curiousthat is, I was wondering,
what do you listen to?
Listen to? Bobby repeats.
You knowmusic. What music are you into?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
150
Bobby lights up. Well, the Sex Pistols, he says, and pauses.
Of course, says Henry, nodding. And the Clash?
Yeah. And, um, Nirvana...
Nirvanas good, says Henry.
Blondie? says Jodie, as though her answer might be wrong.
I like Blondie, I say. And Henry likes Deborah Harry.
Ramones? says Henry. They nod in unison. How about Patti Smith?
Jodie and Bobby look blank.
Iggy Pop?
Bobby shakes his head. Pearl Jam, he offers.
I intercede. We dont have much of a radio station up here, I tell Henry. Theres no
way for them to find out about this stuff.
Oh, Henry says. He pauses. Look, do you want me to write some things down for you?
To listen to? Jodie shrugs. Bobby nods, looking serious, and excited. I forage for paper and
pen in my purse. Henry sits down at the kitchen table, and Bobby sits across from him.
Okay, says Henry. You have to go back to the sixties, right? You start with the Velvet
Underground, in New York. And then, right over here in Detroit, youve got the MC5, and
Iggy Pop and the Stooges. And then back in New York, there were The New York Dolls, and
The Heartbreakers
Tom Petty? says Jodie. Weve heard of him.
Um, no, this was a totally different band, says Henry. Most of them died in the
eighties.
Plane crash? asks Bobby.
Heroin, Henry corrects. Anyway, there was Television, and Richard Hell and the
Voidoids, and Patti Smith.
Talking Heads, I add.
Huh. I dunno. Would you really consider them punk?
They were there.
Okay, Henry adds them to his list, Talking Heads. So then, things move over to
England
I thought punk started in London, says Bobby.
No. Of course, says Henry, pushing back his chair, some people, me included, believe
that punk is just the most recent manifestation of this, this spirit, this feeling, you know, that
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
151
things arent right and that in fact things are so wrong that the only thing we can do is to say
Fuck It, over and over again, really loud, until someone stops us.
 Yes, Bobby says quietly, his face glowing with an almost religious fervor under his
spiked hair. Yes.
Youre corrupting a minor, I tell Henry.
Oh, he would get there anyway, without me. Wouldnt you?
Ive been trying, but it aint easy, here.
I can appreciate that says Henry. Hes adding to the list. I look over his shoulder. Sex
Pistols, The Clash, Gang of Four, Buzzcocks, Dead Kennedys, X, The Mekons, The
Raincoats, The Dead Boys, New Order, The Smiths, Lora Logic, The Au Pairs, Big Black,
PiL, The Pixies, The Breeders, Sonic Youth...
Henry, theyre not going to be able to get any of that up here. He nods, and jots the
phone number and address for Vintage Vinyl at the bottom of the sheet. You do have a
record player, right?
My parents have one, Bobby says. Henry winces.
What do you really like? I ask Jodie. I feel as though shes fallen out of the
conversation during the male bonding ritual Henry and Bobby are conducting.
Prince, she admits. Henry and I let out a big Whoo! and I start singing 1999 as loud as I
can, and Henry jumps up and were doing a bump and grind across the kitchen. Laura hears
us and runs off to put the actual record on and just like that, its a dance party.
HENRY: Were driving back to Clares parents house from Lauras party. Clare says,
Youre awfully quiet.
I was thinking about those kids. The Baby Punks.
Oh, yeah. What about them?
I was trying to figure out what would cause that kid
Bobby.
Bobby, to revert, to latch on to music that was made the year he was born...
Well, I was really into the Beatles, Clare points out. They broke up the year before I
was born.
Yeah, well, what is that about? I mean, you should have been swooning over Depeche
Mode, or Sting or somebody. Bobby and his girlfriend ought to be listening to The Cure if
they want to dress up. But instead theyve stumbled into this thing, punk, that they dont
know anything about
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
152
Im sure its mostly to annoy their parents. Laura was telling me that her dad wont let
Jodie leave the house dressed like that. She puts everything in her backpack and changes in
the ladies room at school, says Clare.
But thats what everybody did, back when. I mean, its about asserting your
individualism, I understand that, but why are they asserting the individualism of 1977? They
ought to be wearing plaid flannel.
Why do you care? Clare says.
It depresses me. Its a reminder that the moment I belonged to is dead, and not just dead,
but forgotten. None of this stuff ever gets played on the radio, I cant figure out why. Its like
it never happened. Thats why I get excited when I see little kids pretending to be punks,
because I dont want it all to just disappear.
Well, says Clare, you can always go back. Most people are glued to the present; you
get to be there again and again.
I think about this. Its just sad, Clare. Even when I get to do something cool, like, say, go
to see a concert I missed the first time around, maybe a band thats broken up or somebody
that died, its sad watching them because I know whats going to happen.
But how is that different from the rest of your life?
It isnt. We have reached the private road that leads to Clares house. She turns in.
Henry?
Yeah?
If you could stop, now... if you could not time travel any more, and there would be no
consequences, would you?
If I could stop now and still meet you?
Youve already met me.
Yes. I would stop. I glance at Clare, dim in the dark car.
It would be funny she says, I would have all these memories that you would never get
to have. It would be likewell, it is like being with somebody who has amnesia. Ive been
feeling that way ever since we got here.
I laugh. So in the future you can watch me lurch along into each memory, until Ive got
the complete set. Collect em all.
She smiles. I guess so. Clare pulls into the circular driveway in front of the house.
Home sweet home.
Later, after we have crept upstairs into our separate rooms and I have put on pajamas and
brushed my teeth and sneaked into Clares room and remembered to lock the door this time
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
153
and we are warm in her narrow bed, she whispers, I wouldnt want you to miss it.
Miss what?
All the things that happened. When I was a kid. I mean, so far they have only halfway
happened, because you arent there yet. So when they happen to you, then its real.
Im on my way. I run my hand over her belly, and down between her legs. Clare
squeals.
Shhh.
Your hand is icy.
Sorry. We fuck carefully, silently. When I finally come its so intense that I get a
horrible headache, and for a minute Im afraid Im going to disappear, but I dont. Instead I
lie in Clares arms, cross-eyed with pain. Clare snores, quiet animal snores that feel like
bulldozers running through my head. I want my own bed, in my own apartment. Home sweet
home. No place like home. Take me home, country roads. Home is where the heart is. But
my heart is here. So I must be home. Clare sighs, turns her head, and is quiet. Hi, honey, Im
home. Im home.
CLARE: Its a clear, cold morning. Breakfast has been eaten. The car is packed. Mark and
Sharon have already left with Daddy for the airport in Kalamazoo. Henry is in the hall saying
goodbye to Alicia; I run upstairs to Mamas room.
Oh, is it so late? she asks when she sees me wearing my coat and boots. I thought you
were staying to lunch. Mama is sitting at her desk, which as always is covered with pieces
of paper which are covered with her extravagant handwriting.
What are you working on? Whatever it is, its full of scratched-out words and doodles.
Mama turns the page face down. Shes very secretive about her writing. Nothing. Its a
poem about the garden under the snow. It isnt coming out well at all. Mama stands up,
walks to the window. Funny how poems are never as nice as the real garden. My poems,
anyway.
I cant really comment on this because Mama has never let me read one of her poems, so I
say, Well, the garden is beautiful, and she waves the compliment away. Praise means
nothing to Mama, she doesnt believe it. Only criticism can flush her cheeks and catch her
attention. If I were to say something disparaging she would remember it always. There is an
awkward pause. I realize that she is waiting for me to leave so she can go back to her writing.
Bye, Mama, I say. I kiss her cool face, and escape.
HENRY: Weve been on the road for about an hour. For miles the highway was bordered by
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
154
pine trees; now we are in flat land full of barbed-wire fences. Neither of us has spoken in a
while. As soon as I notice it the silence is strange, and so I say something.
That wasnt so bad. My voice is too cheerful, too loud in the small car. Clare doesnt
answer, and I look over at her. Shes crying; tears are running down her cheeks as she drives,
pretending that shes not crying. Ive never seen Clare cry before, and something about her
silent stoic tears unnerves me. Clare. Clare, maybecould you maybe pull over for a
minute? Without looking at me, she slows down and drives onto the shoulder, stops. We are
somewhere in Indiana. The sky is blue and there are many crows in the field at the side of the
road. Clare leans her forehead against the steering wheel and takes a long ragged breath.
Clare. Im talking to the back of her head. Clare, Im sorry. Was it did I fuck up
somehow? What happened? I
Its not you, she says under her veil of hair. We sit like this for minutes.
Whats wrong, then? Clare shakes her head, and I sit and stare at her. Finally I gather
enough courage to touch her. I stroke her hair, feeling the bones of her neck and spine
through the thick shimmering waves. She turns and Im holding her awkwardly across the
divided seats and now Clare is crying hard, shuddering.
Then shes quiet. Then she says, God damn Mama.
Later we are sitting in a traffic jam on the Dan Ryan Expressway, listening to Irma
Thomas. Henry? Was itdid you mind very much?
Mind what? I ask, thinking about Clare crying.
But she says, My family? Are theydid they seem?
They were fine, Clare. I really liked them. Especially Alicia.
Sometimes I just want to push them all into Lake Michigan and watch them sink.
Um, I know the feeling. Hey, I think your dad and your brother have seen me before.
And Alicia said something really strange just as we were leaving.
I saw you with Dad and Mark once. And Alicia definitely saw you in the basement one
day when she was twelve.
Is that going to be a problem?
No, because the explanation is too weird to be believed. We both laugh, and the tension
that has ridden with us all the way to Chicago dissipates. Traffic begins to accelerate. Soon
Clare stops in front of my apartment building. I take my bag from the trunk, and I watch as
Clare pulls away and glides down Dearborn, and my throat closes up. Hours later I identify
what I am feeling as loneliness, and Christmas is officially over for another year.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
155
HOME IS ANYWHERE YOU HANG YOUR HEAD
Saturday, May 9, 1992 (Henry is 28)
HENRY: Ive decided that the best strategy is to just ask straight out; either he says yes or no.
I take the Ravenswood El to Dads apartment, the home of my youth. I havent been here
much lately; Dad seldom invites me over and Im not given to showing up unannounced, the
way Im about to do. But if he wont answer his phone, what does he expect? I get off at
Western and walk west on Lawrence. The two-flat is on Virginia; the back porch looks over
the Chicago River. As I stand in the foyer fumbling for my key Mrs. Kim peeps out of her
door and furtively gestures for me to step in. I am alarmed; Kimy is usually very hearty and
loud and affectionate, and although she knows everything there is to know about us she never
interferes. Well, almost never. Actually, she gets pretty involved in our lives, but we like it. I
sense that she is really upset.
You like a Coke? Shes already marching toward her kitchen.
Sure. I set my backpack by the front door and follow her. In the kitchen she cracks the
metal lever of an old-fashioned ice cube tray. I always marvel at Kimys strength. She must
be seventy and to me she seems exactly the same as when I was little. I spent a lot of time
down here, helping her make dinner for Mr. Kim (who died five years ago), reading, doing
homework, and watching TV. I sit at the kitchen table and she sets a glass of Coke brimming
with ice before me. She has a half-consumed cup of instant coffee in one of the bone china
cups with hummingbirds painted around the rim. I remember the first time she allowed me to
drink coffee out of one of those cups; I was thirteen. I felt like a grown-up.
Long time no see, buddy.
Ouch. I know. Im sorry.. .time has been moving kind of fast, lately.
She appraises me. Kimy has piercing black eyes, which seem to see the very back of my
brain. Her flat Korean face conceals all emotion unless she wants you to see it. She is a
fantastic bridge player.
You been time traveling?
No. In fact, I havent been anywhere for months. Its been great.
You got a girlfriend?
I grin.
Ho ho. Okay, I know all about it. Whats her name? How come you dont bring her
around?
Her name is Clare. I have offered to bring her around several times and he always turns
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
156
me down.
You dont offer to me. You come here, Richard will come, too. Well have duck
almondine.
As usual I am impressed with my own obtusity. Mrs. Kim knows the perfect way to
dissolve all social difficulties. My dad feels no compunction about being a jerk to me, but he
will always make an effort for Mrs. Kim, as well he should, since she pretty much raised his
child and probably isnt charging him market rent.
Youre a genius.
Yes, I am. How come I dont get a MacArthur grant? I ask you?
Dunno. Maybe youre not getting out of the house enough. I dont think the MacArthur
people are hanging out at Bingo World.
No, they already got enough money. So when you getting married?
Coke comes up my nose, Im laughing so hard. Kimy lurches up and starts thumping me
on the back. I subside, and she sits back down, grumpily. Whats so funny? Im just asking.
I get to ask, huh?
No, thats not itI mean, Im not laughing because its ludicrous, Im laughing because
you are reading my mind. I came over to ask Dad to let me have Moms rings.
Ohhhhh. Boy, I dont know. Wow, youre getting married. Hey! Thats great! She gonna
say yes?
I think so. Im ninety-nine percent sure.
Well, thats pretty good, I dont know about your moms rings, though. See, what I want
to tell you her eyes glance at the ceiling your dad, hes not doing too good. Hes yelling
a lot, and throwing stuff, and hes not practicing.
Oh. Well, thats not totally surprising. But its not good. You been up there, lately?
Kimy is ordinarily in Dads apartment a lot. I think she surreptitiously cleans it. Ive seen her
defiantly ironing Dads tux shirts, daring me to comment.
He wont let me in! Shes on the verge of tears. This is very bad. My dad certainly has
his problems, but it is monstrous of him to let them affect Kimy.
But when hes not there? Usually I pretend not to know that Kimy is in and out of
Dads apartment without his knowledge; she pretends that she would never do such a thing.
But actually Im appreciative, now that I no longer live here. Someone has to keep an eye on
him.
She looks guilty, and crafty, and slightly alarmed that I am mentioning this. Okay. Yeah,
I go in once, cause I worry about him. Hes got trash everywhere; were gonna get bugs if
he keep this up. Hes got nothing in that fridge but beer and lemons. Hes got so much
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
157
clothes on the bed I dont think he sleeps in it. I dont know what hes doing. I never seen
him this bad since when your mom died.
Oh boy. What do you think? Theres a big crash above our heads, which means Dad has
dropped something on the kitchen floor. Hes probably just getting up. I guess Id better go
up there 
Yeah. Kimy is wistful. Hes such a nice guy, your dad; I dont know why he lets it get
like this.
Hes an alcoholic. Thats what alcoholics do. Its in their job description: Fall apart, and
then keep falling apart.
She levels her devastating gaze at me. Speaking of jobs...
Yes? Oh shit.
I dont think hes been working.
Well, its the off-season. He doesnt work in May.
They are touring Europe and hes here. Also, he dont pay rent last two months.
Damn damn damn. Kimy, why didnt you call me? Thats awful. Geez. I am on my feet
and down the hall; I grab my backpack and return to the kitchen. I delve around in it and find
my checkbook. How much does he owe you?
Mrs. Kim is deeply embarrassed. No, Henry, donthell pay it.
He can pay me back. Cmon, buddy, its okay. Cough it out, now, how much?
Shes not looking at me. $1,200.00, she says in a small voice.
Thats all? What are you doing, buddy, running the Philanthropic Society for the Support
of Wayward DeTambles? I write the check and stick it under her saucer. You better cash
that or Ill come looking for you.
Well, then I wont cash it and you will have to visit me.
Ill visit you anyway. I am utterly guilt stricken. I will bring Clare.
Kimy beams at me. I hope so. Im gonna be your maid of honor, right?
If Dad doesnt shape up you can give me away. Actually, thats a great idea: you can
walk me down the aisle, and Clare will be waiting in her tux, and the organist will be playing
Lohengrin....
I better buy a dress.
Yow. Dont buy any dresses until I tell you its a done deal. I sigh. I guess I better go
up there and talk to him. I stand up. In Mrs. Kims kitchen I feel enormous, suddenly, as
though Im visiting my old grammar school and marveling over the size of the desks. She
stands slowly and follows me to the front door. I hug her. For a moment she seems fragile
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
158
and lost, and I wonder about her life, the telescoping days of cleaning and gardening and
bridge playing, but then my own concerns crash back in again. I will come back soon; I cant
spend my entire life hiding in bed with Clare. Kimy watches as I open Dads door.
Hey, Dad? You home?
Theres a pause, and then, GO AWAY.
I walk up the stairs and Mrs. Kim shuts her door.
The first thing that hits me is the smell: something is rotting in here. The living room is
devastated. Where are all the books? My parents had tons of books, on music, on history,
novels, in French, in German, in Italian: where are they? Even the record and CD collection
seems smaller. There are papers all over, junk mail, newspapers, scores, covering the floor.
My mothers piano is coated with dust and there is a vase of long-dead gladiolas
mummifying on the windowsill. I walk down the hall, glancing in the bedrooms. Utter chaos;
clothes, garbage, more newspapers. In the bathroom a bottle of Michelob lies under the sink
and a glossy dry layer of beer varnishes the tile.
In the kitchen my father sits at the table with his back to me, looking out the window at
the river. He doesnt turn around as I enter. He doesnt look at me when I sit down. But he
doesnt get up and leave, either, so I take it as a sign that conversation may proceed.
Hi, Dad.
Silence.
I saw Mrs. Kim, just now. She says youre not doing too good.
Silence.
I hear youre not working.
Its May.
How come youre not on tour?
He finally looks at me. Under the stubbornness there is fright. Im on sick leave.
Since when?
March.
Paid sick leave?
Silence.
Are you sick? Whats wrong?
I think hes going to ignore me, but then he answers by holding out his hands. They are
shaking as though they are in their own tiny earthquake. Hes done it, finally. Twenty-three
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
159
years of determined drinking and hes destroyed his ability to play the violin.
Oh, Dad. Oh, God. What does Stan say?
He says thats it. The nerves are shot, and they arent coming back.
Jesus. We look at each other for an unendurable minute. His face is anguished, and Im
beginning to understand: he has nothing. There is nothing left to hold him, to keep him, to be
his life. First Mom, then his music, gone, gone. I never mattered much to begin with, so my
belated efforts will be inconsequential. What happens now?
Silence. Nothing happens now.
You cant just stay up here and drink for the next twenty years.
He looks at the table.
What about your pension? Workers comp? Medicare? AA?
Hes done nothing, let everything slide. Where have I been?
I paid your rent.
Oh. Hes confused. Didnt I pay it?
No. You owed for two months. Mrs. Kim was very embarrassed. She didnt want to tell
me, and she didnt want me giving her money, but theres no sense making your problems
her problems.
Poor Mrs. Kim. Tears are coursing down my fathers cheeks. He is old. Theres no
other word for it. Hes fifty-seven, and hes an old man. I am not angry, now. Im sorry, and
frightened for him.
Dad. He is looking at me again. Look. You have to let me do some things for you,
okay? He looks away, out the window again at the infinitely more interesting trees on the
other side of the water. You need to let me see your pension documents and bank statements
and all that. You need to let Mrs. Kim and me clean this place. And you need to stop
drinking.
No.
No, what? Everything or just some of it?
Silence. Im starting to lose my patience, so I decide to change the subject. Dad. Im
going to get married.
Now I have his attention.
To who? Who would marry you? He says this, I think, without malice. Hes genuinely
curious. I take out my wallet and remove a picture of Clare from its plastic pocket. In the
picture Clare is looking out serenely over Lighthouse Beach. Her hair floats like a banner in
the breeze and in the early morning light she seems to glow against a background of dark
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
160
trees. Dad takes the picture and studies it carefully.
Her name is Clare Abshire. Shes an artist
Well. Shes pretty, he says grudgingly. This is as close as Im going to get to a paternal
blessing.
I would like...1 would really like to give her Moms wedding and engagement rings. I
think Mom would have liked that.
How would you know? You probably hardly remember her.
I dont want to discuss it, but I feel suddenly determined to have my way. I see her on a
regular basis. Ive seen her hundreds of times since she died. I see her walking around the
neighborhood, with you, with me. She goes to the park and learns scores, she shops, she has
coffee with Mara at Tias. I see her with Uncle Ish. I see her at Juilliard. I hear her sing!
Dad is gaping at me. Im destroying him, but I cant seem to stop. I have spoken to her.
Once I stood next to her on a crowded train, touching her. Dad is crying. Its not always a
curse, okay? Sometimes time travel is a great thing. I needed to see her, and sometimes I get
to see her. She would have loved Clare, she would have wanted me to be happy, and she
would deplore the way youve fucked everything up just because she died.
He sits at the kitchen table and weeps. He cries, not covering his face, but simply
lowering his head and letting the tears stream from him. I watch him for a while, the price of
losing my temper. Then I go to the bathroom and return with the roll of toilet paper. He takes
some, blindly, and blows his nose. Then we sit there for a few minutes.
Why didnt you tell me?
What do you mean?
Why didnt you tell me you could see her? I wouldve liked.. .to know that.
Why didnt I tell him? Because any normal father would have figured out by now that the
stranger haunting their early married life was really his abnormal, time-traveling son.
Because I was scared to: because he hated me for surviving. Because I could secretly feel
superior to him for something he saw as a defect. Ugly reasons like that.
Because I thought it would hurt you.
Oh. No. It doesnt... hurt me; I...its good to know shes there, somewhere. I mean...the
worst thing is that shes gone. So its good that shes out there. Even if I cant see her.
She seems happy, usually.
Yes, she was very happy.. .we were happy.
Yeah. You were like a different person. I always wondered what it would have been like
to grow up with you the way you were, then.
He stands up, slowly. I remain seated, and he walks unsteadily down the hall and into his
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
161
bedroom. I hear him rummaging around, and then he comes slowly back with a small satin
pouch. He reaches into it, and withdraws a dark blue jewelers box. He opens it, and takes
out the two delicate rings. They rest like seeds in his long, shaking hand. Dad puts his left
hand over the right hand that holds the rings, and sits like that for a bit, as though the rings
are lightning bugs trapped in his two hands. His eyes are closed. Then he opens his eyes, and
reaches out his right hand: I cup my hands together, and he turns the rings onto my waiting
palms.
The engagement ring is an emerald, and the dim light from the window is refracted green
and white in it. The rings are silver, and they need cleaning. They need wearing, and I know
just the girl to wear them.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
162
BIRTHDAY
Sunday, May 24, 1992 (Clare is 21, Henry is 28)
CLARE: Its my twenty-first birthday. Its a perfect summer evening. Im at Henrys
apartment, in Henrys bed, reading The Moonstone. Henry is in the tiny kitchenette making
dinner. As I don his bathrobe and head for the bathroom I hear him swearing at the blender. I
take my time, wash my hair, steam up the mirrors. I think about cutting my hair. How nice it
would be to wash it, run a quick comb through it, and presto! all set, ready to rock and roll. I
sigh. Henry loves my hair almost as though it is a creature unto itself, as though it has a soul
to call its own, as though it could love him back. I know he loves it as part of me, but I also
know that he would be deeply upset if I cut it off. And I would miss it, too.. .its just so much
effort, sometimes I want to take it off like a wig and set it aside while I go out and play. I
comb it carefully, working out the tangles. My hair is heavy when its wet. It pulls on my
scalp. I prop the bathroom door open to dissipate the steam. Henry is singing something from
Carmina Burana; it sounds weird and off key. I emerge from the bathroom and he is setting
the table. Perfect timing; dinner is served 
Just a minute, let me get dressed.
Youre fine as you are. Really. Henry walks around the table, opens the bathrobe, and
runs his hands lightly over my breasts.
Mmm. Dinner will get cold.
Dinner is cold. I mean, its supposed to be cold.
Oh....Well, lets eat. Im suddenly exhausted, and cranky.
Okay. Henry releases me without comment. He returns to setting out silverware. I
watch him for a minute, then pick up my clothes from their various places on the floor and
put them on. I sit down at the table; Henry brings out two bowls of soup, pale and thick.
Vichyssoise. This is my grandmothers recipe. I take a sip. Its perfect, buttery and cool.
The next course is salmon, with long pieces of asparagus in an olive oil and rosemary
marinade. I open my mouth to say something nice about the food and instead say, Henry
do other people have sex as much as we do?
Henry considers. Most people.. .no, I imagine not. Only people who havent known each
other very long and still cant believe their luck, I would think. Is it too much?
I dont know. Maybe. I say this looking at my plate. I cant believe Im saying this; I
spent my entire adolescence begging Henry to fuck me and now Im telling him its too
much. Henry sits very still.
Clare, Im so sorry. I didnt realize; I wasnt thinking.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
163
I look up; Henry looks stricken. I burst out laughing. Henry smiles, a little guilty, but his
eyes are twinkling.
Its justyou know, there are days when I cant sit down.
Well.. .you just have to say. SayNot tonight, dear, weve already done it twenty-three
times today and I would rather read Bleak House.
And you will meekly cease and desist?
I did, just then, didnt I? That was pretty meek.
Yeah. But then I felt guilty.
Henry laughs. You cant expect me to help you out there. It may be my only hope: day
after day, week after week, I will languish, starving for a kiss, withering away for want of a
blow job, and after a while you will look up from your book and realize that Im actually
going to die at your feet if you dont fuck me immediately but I wont say a word. Maybe a
few little whimpering noises.
ButI dont know, I mean, Im exhausted, and you seem...fine. Am I abnormal, or
something?
Henry leans across the table and holds out his hands. I place mine in his.
Clare.
Yes?
It may be indelicate to mention this, but if you will excuse me for saying so, your sex
drive far outstrips that of almost all the women Ive dated. Most women would have cried
Uncle and turned on their answering machines months ago. But I should have thought.. .you
always seemed into it. But if its too much, or you dont feel like it, you have to say so,
because otherwise Ill be tiptoeing around, wondering if Im burdening you with my hideous
demands.
But how much sex is enough?
For me? Oh, God. My idea of the perfect life would be if we just stayed in bed all the
time. We could make love more or less continuously, and only get up to bring in supplies,
you know, fresh water and fruit to prevent scurvy, and make occasional trips to the bathroom
to shave before diving back into bed. And once in a while we could change the sheets. And
go to the movies to prevent bedsores. And running. I would still have to run every morning.
Running is a religion with Henry.
How come running? Since youd be getting so much exercise anyway?
He is suddenly serious. Because quite frequently my life depends on running faster than
whoevers chasing me.
Oh. Now its my turn to be abashed, because I already knew that. Buthow do I put
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
164
this?you never seem to go anywherethat is, since I met you here in the present youve
hardly time traveled at all. Have you?
Well, at Christmas, you saw that. And around Thanksgiving. You were in Michigan, and
I didnt mention it because it was depressing.
You were watching the accident?
Henry stares at me. Actually, I was. How did you know?
A few years ago you showed up at Meadowlark on Christmas Eve and told me about it.
You were really upset.
Yeah. I remember being unhappy just seeing that date on the List, thinking, gee, an extra
Christmas to get through. Plus that was a bad one in regular time; I ended up with alcohol
poisoning and had to have my stomach pumped. I hope I didnt ruin yours.
No.. .I was happy to see you. And you were telling me something that was important,
personal, even though you were careful not to tell any names or places. It was still your real
life, and I was desperate for anything that helped me believe you were real and not some
psychosis of mine. Thats also why I was always touching you. I laugh. I never realized
how difficult I was making things for you. I mean, I did everything I could think of, and you
were just cool as could be. You must have been dying
For example?
Whats for dessert?
Henry dutifully gets up and brings dessert. Its mango ice cream with raspberries. It has
one little candle sticking out of it at an angle; Henry sings Happy Birthday and I giggle
because hes so off-key; I make a wish and blow out the candle. The ice cream tastes superb;
I am very cheerful, and I scan my memory for an especially egregious episode of Henry
baiting.
Okay. This was the worst. When I was sixteen, I was waiting for you late one night. It
was about eleven oclock, and there was a new moon, so it was pretty dark in the clearing.
And I was kind of annoyed with you, because you were resolutely treating me likea child,
or a pal, or whateverand I was just crazy to lose my virginity. I suddenly got the idea that I
would hide your clothes....
Oh, no.
Yes. So I moved the clothes to a different spot... Im a little ashamed of this story, but
its too late now.
And?
And you appeared, and I basically teased you until you couldnt take it.
And?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
165
And you jumped me and pinned me, and for about thirty seconds we both thought This
is it. I mean, it wasnt like you wouldve been raping me, because I was absolutely asking
for it. But you got this look on your face, and you said No, and you got up and walked
away. You walked right through the Meadow into the trees and I didnt see you again for
three weeks.
Wow. Thats a better man than I.
I was so chastened by the whole thing that I made a huge effort to behave myself for the
next two years.
Thank goodness. I cant imagine having to exercise that much willpower on a regular
basis.
Ah, but you will, thats the amazing part. For a long time I actually thought you were not
attracted to me. Of course, if we are going to spend our whole lives in bed, I suppose you can
exercise a little restraint on your jaunts into my past.
Well, you know, Im not kidding about wanting that much sex. I mean, I realize that its
not practical. But Ive been wanting to tell you: I feel so different. I just.. .feel so connected
to you. And I think that it holds me here, in the present. Being physically connected the way
that we are, its kind of rewiring my brain. Henry is stroking my hand with his fingertips.
He looks up. I have something for you. Come and sit over here.
I get up and follow him into the living room. Hes turned the bed into the couch and I sit
down. The sun is setting and the room is washed in rose and tangerine light. Henry opens his
desk, reaches into a pigeonhole, and produces a little satin bag. He sits slightly apart from
me; our knees are touching. He must be able to hear my heart beating, I think. Its come to
this, I think. Henry takes my hands and looks at me gravely. Ive waited for this so long and
here it is and Im frightened.
Clare?
Yes? My voice is small and scared.
You know that I love you. Will you marry me?
Yes...Henry. I have an overwhelming sense of deja vu. But you know, really.. .1
already have.
Sunday, May 31, 1992 (Clare is 21, Henry is 28)
CLARE: Henry and I are standing in the vestibule of the apartment building he grew up in.
Were a little late already, but we are just standing here; Henry is leaning against the
mailboxes and breathing slowly with his eyes closed.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
166
Dont worry, I say. It cant be any worse than you meeting Mama.
Your parents were very nice to me.
But Mama is.. .unpredictable.
Sos Dad. Henry inserts his key into the front door lock and we walk up one flight of
stairs and Henry knocks on the door of an apartment. Immediately it is opened by a tiny old
Korean woman: Kimy. Shes wearing a blue silk dress and bright red lipstick, and her
eyebrows have been drawn on a little lopsided. Her hair is salt-and-pepper gray; its braided
and coiled into two buns at her ears. For some reason she reminds me of Ruth Gordon. She
comes up to my shoulder, and she tilts her head back and says, Ohhh, Henry, shes bee-yootiful!
I can feel myself turn red. Henry says, Kimy, where are your manners? and Kimy
laughs and says, Hello, Miss Clare Abshire! and I say Hello, Mrs. Kim. We smile at
each other, and she says, Oh, you got to call me Kimy, everybody call me Kimy. I nod and
follow her into the living room and theres Henrys dad, sitting in an armchair.
He doesnt say anything, just looks at me. Henrys dad is thin, tall, angular, and tired. He
doesnt look much like Henry. He has short gray hair, dark eyes, a long nose, and a thin
mouth whose corners turn down a little. Hes sitting all bunched up in his chair, and I notice
his hands, long elegant hands that lie in his lap like a cat napping.
Henry coughs and says, Dad, this is Clare Abshire. Clare, this is my father, Richard
DeTamble.
Mr. DeTamble slowly extends one of his hands, and I step forward and shake it. Its ice
cold. Hello, Mr. DeTamble. Its nice to meet you, I say.
Is it? Henry must not have told you very much about me, then. His voice is hoarse and
amused. I will have to capitalize on your optimism. Come and sit down by me. Kimy, may
we have something to drink?
I was just going to ask everyoneClare, what would you like? I made sangria, you like
that? Henry, how bout you? Sangria? Okay. Richard, you like a beer?
Everyone seems to pause for a moment. Then Mr. DeTamble says, No, Kimy, I think Ill
just have tea, if you dont mind making it. Kimy smiles and disappears into the kitchen, and
Mr. DeTamble turns to me and says, I have a bit of a cold. Ive taken some of that cold
medicine, but Im afraid it just makes me drowsy.
Henry is sitting on the couch, watching us. All the furniture is white and looks as though
it was bought at a JCPenney around 1945. The upholstery is protected with clear plastic, and
there are vinyl runners over the white carpet. Theres a fireplace that looks as though its
never used; above it is a beautiful ink painting of bamboo in wind.
Thats a wonderful painting, I say, because no one is saying anything.
Mr. DeTamble seems pleased. Do you like it? Annette and I brought it back from Japan
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
167
in 1962. We bought it in Kyoto, but the original is from China. We thought Kimy and Dong
would like it. It is a seventeenth-century copy of a much older painting.
Tell Clare about the poem  Henry says.
Yes; the poem goes something like this: Bamboo without mind, yet sends thoughts
soaring among clouds. Standing on the lone mountain, quiet, dignified, it typifies the will of
a gentleman. Painted and written with a light heart, Wu Chen.
Thats lovely, I say. Kimy comes in with drinks on a tray, and Henry and I each take a
glass of sangria while Mr. DeTamble carefully grasps his tea with both hands; the cup rattles
against the saucer as he sets it on the table beside him. Kimy sits in a small armchair by the
fireplace and sips her sangria. I taste mine and realize that its really strong. Henry glances at
me and raises his eyebrows.
Kimy says, Do you like gardens, Clare?
Um, yes, I say. My mother is a gardener.
You got to come out before dinner and see the backyard. All my peonies are blooming,
and we got to show you the river.
That sounds nice. We all troop out to the yard. I admire the Chicago River, placidly
flowing at the foot of a precarious stairway; I admire the peonies. Kimy asks, What kind of
garden does your mom have? Does she grow roses? Kimy has a tiny but well-ordered rose
garden, all hybrid teas as far as I can tell.
She does have a rose garden. Actually, Mamas real passion is irises.
Oh. I got irises. Theyre over there. Kimy points to a clump of iris. I need to divide
them, you think your mom would like some?
I dont know. I could ask. Mama has more than two hundred varieties of iris. I catch
Henry smiling behind Kimys back and I frown at him. I could ask her if she wants to trade
you some of hers; she has some that she bred herself, and she likes to give them to friends.
Your mother breeds iris? Mr. DeTamble asks.
Uh-huh. She also breeds tulips, but the irises are her favorites.
She is a professional gardener?
No, I say. Just an amateur. She has a gardener who does most of the work and theres a
bunch of people who come in and mow and weed and all that.
Must be a big yard, Kimy says. She leads the way back into the apartment. In the
kitchen a timer goes off. Okay, says Kimy. Its time to eat. I ask if I can help but Kimy
waves me into a chair. I sit across from Henry. His dad is on my right and Kimys empty
chair is on my left. I notice that Mr. DeTamble is wearing a sweater, even though its pretty
warm in here. Kimy has very pretty china; there are hummingbirds painted on it. Each of us
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
168
has a sweating cold glass of water. Kimy pours us white wine. She hesitates at Henrys dads
glass but passes him over when he shakes his head. She brings out salads and sits down. Mr.
DeTamble raises his water glass. To the happy couple, he says. Happy couple, says
Kimy, and we all touch glasses and drink. Kimy says, So, Clare, Henry say you are an artist.
What kind of artist?
I make paper. Paper sculptures.
Ohh. You have to show me sometime cause I dont know about that. Like origami?
Uh, no.
Henry intercedes. Theyre like that German artist we saw down at the Art Institute, you
know, Anselm Kiefer. Big dark scary paper sculptures.
Kimy looks puzzled. Why would a pretty girl like you make ugly things like that?
Henry laughs. Its art, Kimy. Besides, theyre beautiful.
I use a lot of flowers, I tell Kimy. If you give me your dead roses Ill put them in the
piece Im working on now.
Okay, she says. What is it?
A giant crow made out of roses, hair, and daylily fiber.
Huh. How come a crow? Crows are bad luck.
They are? I think theyre gorgeous.
Mr. DeTamble raises one eyebrow and for just a second he does look like Henry; he says,
You have peculiar ideas about beauty.
Kimy gets up and clears our salad plates and brings in a bowl of green beans and a
steaming plate of Roast Duck with Raspberry Pink Peppercorn Sauce. Its heavenly. I
realize where Henry learned to cook. What you think? Kimy demands. Its delicious,
Kimy, says Mr. DeTamble, and I echo his praise. Maybe cut down on the sugar? Henry
asks. Yeah, I think so, too, says Kimy. Its really tender though, Henry says, and Kimy
grins. I stretch out my hand to pick up my wine glass. Mr. DeTamble nods at me and says,
Annettes ring looks well on you.
Its very beautiful. Thank you for letting me have it.
Theres a lot of history in that ring, and the wedding band that goes with it. It was made
in Paris in 1823 for my great-great-great-grandmother, whose name was Jeanne. It came to
America in 1920 with my grandmother, Yvette, and its been sitting in a drawer since 1969,
when Annette died. Its good to see it back out in the light of day.
I look at the ring, and think, Henrys mom was wearing this when she died. I glance at
Henry, who seems to be thinking the same thing, and at Mr. DeTamble, who is eating his
duck. Tell me about Annette, I ask Mr. DeTamble.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
169
He puts down his fork and leans his elbows on the table, puts his hands against his
forehead. He peers at me from behind his hands. Well, Im sure Henry must have told you
something.
Yes. A little. I grew up listening to her records; my parents are fans of hers.
Mr. DeTamble smiles. Ah. Well then, you know that Annette had the most marvelous
voice...rich, and pure, such a voice, and such range...she could express her soul with that
voice, whenever I listened to her I felt my life meant more than mere biology... she could
really hear, she understood structure and she could analyze exactly what it was about a piece
of music that had to be rendered just so...she was a very emotional person, Annette. She
brought that out in other people. After she died I dont think I ever really felt anything
again.
He pauses. I cant look at Mr. DeTamble so I look at Henry. Hes staring at his father with
an expression of such sadness that I look at my plate.
Mr. DeTamble says, But you asked about Annette, not about me. She was kind, and she
was a great artist; you dont often find that those go together. Annette made people happy;
she was happy herself. She enjoyed life. I only saw her cry twice: once when I gave her that
ring and the other time when she had Henry.
Another pause. Finally I say, You were very lucky.
He smiles, still shielding his face in his hands. Well, we were and we werent. One
minute we had everything we could dream of, and the next minute she was in pieces on the
expressway. Henry winces.
But dont you think, I persist, that its better to be extremely happy for a short while,
even if you lose it, than to be just okay for your whole life?
Mr. DeTamble regards me. He takes his hands away from his face and stares. Then he
says, Ive often wondered about that. Do you believe that?
I think about my childhood, all the waiting, and wondering, and the joy of seeing Henry
walking through the Meadow after not seeing him for weeks, months, and I think about what
it was like not to see him for two years and then to find him standing in the Reading Room at
the Newberry Library: the joy of being able to touch him, the luxury of knowing where he is,
of knowing he loves me. Yes, I say. I do. I meet Henrys eyes and smile.
Mr. DeTamble nods. Henry has chosen well. Kimy gets up to bring coffee and while
shes in the kitchen Mr. DeTamble continues, He isnt calibrated to bring peace to anyones
life. In fact, he is in many ways the opposite of his mother: unreliable, volatile, and not even
especially concerned with anyone but himself. Tell me, Clare: why on earth would a lovely
girl like you want to marry Henry?
Everything in the room seems to hold its breath. Henry stiffens but doesnt say anything. I
lean forward and smile at Mr. DeTamble and say, with enthusiasm, as though he has asked
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
170
me what flavor of ice cream I like best: Because hes really, really good in bed. In the
kitchen theres a howl of laughter. Mr. DeTamble glances at Henry, who raises his eyebrows
and grins, and finally even Mr. DeTamble smiles, and says,  Touch, my dear.
Later, after we have drunk our coffee and eaten Kimys perfect almond torte, after Kimy
has shown me photographs of Henry as a baby, a toddler, a high school senior (to his
extreme embarrassment); after Kimy has extracted more information about my family (How
many rooms? That many! Hey, buddy, how come you dont tell me she beautiful and rich?),
we all stand at the front door and I thank Kimy for dinner and say good night to Mr.
DeTamble.
It was a pleasure, Clare, he says. But you must call me Richard.
Thank you.. .Richard. He takes my hand for a moment and for just that moment I see
him as Annette must have seen him, years agoand then its gone and he nods awkwardly at
Henry, who kisses Kimy, and we walk downstairs and into the summer evening. It seems like
years have passed since we went inside.
Whoosh, says Henry. I died a thousand deaths, just watching that.
Was I okay?
Okay? You were brilliant! He loved you!
We are walking down the street, holding hands. Theres a playground at the end of the
block and I run to the swings and climb on, and Henry takes the one next to me, facing the
opposite direction, and we swing higher and higher, passing each other, sometimes in synch
and sometimes streaming past each other so fast it seems like were going to collide, and we
laugh, and laugh, and nothing can ever be sad, no one can be lost, or dead, or far away: right
now we are here, and nothing can mar our perfection, or steal the joy of this perfect moment.
Wednesday, June 10, 1992 (Clare is 21)
CLARE: Im sitting by myself at a tiny table in the front window of Cafe Peregolisi, a
venerable little rat hole with excellent coffee. Im supposed to be working on a paper on
Alice in Wonderland for the History of the Grotesque class Im taking this summer; instead
Im daydreaming, staring idly at the natives, who are bustling and hustling in the early
evening of Halsted Street. I dont often come to Boys Town. I figure I will get more work
done if Im somewhere that no one I know will think to look for me. Henry has disappeared.
Hes not home and he wasnt at work today. I am trying not to worry about it. I am trying to
cultivate a nonchalant and carefree attitude. Henry can take care of himself. Just because I
have no idea where he might be doesnt mean anything is wrong. Who knows? Maybe hes
with me.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
171
Someone is standing on the other side of the street, waving. I squint, focus, and realize
that its the short black woman who was with Ingrid that night at the Aragon. Celia. I wave
back, and she crosses the street. Suddenly shes standing in front of me. She is so small that
her face is level with mine, although I am sitting and she is standing.
Hi, Clare, Celia says. Her voice is like butter. I want to wrap myself in her voice and go
to sleep.
Hello, Celia. Have a seat. She sits, opposite me, and I realize that all of her shortness is
in her legs; sitting down she is much more normal looking.
I hear tell you got engaged, she says.
I hold up my left hand, show her the ring. The waiter slouches over to us and Celia orders
Turkish coffee. She looks at me, and gives me a sly smile. Her teeth are white and long and
crooked. Her eyes are large and her eyelids hover halfway closed as though shes falling
asleep. Her dreadlocks are piled high and decorated with pink chopsticks that match her
shiny pink dress.
Youre either brave or crazy, she says.
So people tell me.
Well, by now you ought to know.
I smile, shrug, sip my coffee, which is room temperature and too sweet.
Celia says, Do you know where Henry is right now?
No. Do you know where Ingrid is right now?
Uh-huh, Celia says. Shes sitting on a bar stool in Berlin, waiting on me. She checks
her watch. Im late. The light from the street turns her burnt-umber skin blue and then
purple. She looks like a glamorous Martian. She smiles at me. Henry is running down
Broadway in his birthday suit with a pack of skinheads on his tail Oh, no.
The waiter brings Celias coffee and I point at my cup. He refills it and I carefully
measure a teaspoon of sugar in and stir. Celia stands a demi-tasse spoon straight up in the
tiny cup of Turkish coffee. It is black and dense as molasses. Once upon a time there were
three little sisters. ..and they lived at the bottom of a well... Why did they live at the bottom of
a well?...It was a treacle well.
Celia is waiting for me to say something. Curtsy while youre thinking what to say. It
saves time. Really? I say. Oh, brilliant, Clare.
You dont seem too worried. My man were running around in his altogether like that I
would wonder a little bit, myself.
Yeah, well, Henrys not exactly the most average person.
Celia laughs. You can say that again, sister. How much does she know? Does Ingrid
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
172
know? Celia leans toward me, sips her coffee, opens her eyes wide, raises her eyebrows and
purses her lips. You really gonna marry him?
A mad impulse makes me say, If you dont believe me you can watch me do it. Come to
the wedding.
Celia shakes her head. Me? You know, Henry dont like me at all. Not one bit.
Well, you dont seem to be a big fan of his, either.
Celia grins. I am now. He dumped Miss Ingrid Carmichel hard, and Im picking up the
pieces. She glances at her watch again. Speaking of whom, I am late for my date. Celia
stands up, and says, Why dont you come along?
Oh, no thanks.
Come on, girl. You and Ingrid ought to get to know each other. You have so much in
common. Well have a little bachelorette party.
In Berlin?
Celia laughs. Not the city. The bar. Her laugh is caramel; it seems to emanate from the
body of someone much larger. I dont want her to go, but....
No, I dont think that would be such a good idea. I look Celia in the eye. It seems
mean. Her gaze holds me, and I think of snakes, of cats. Do cats eat bats?.. .Do bats eat
cats? Besides, I have to finish this.
Celia flashes a look at my notebook. What, is that homework? Ohh, its a school night!
Now just listen to your big sister Celia, who knows whats best for little schoolgirlshey,
you old enough to drink?
Yes  I tell her proudly. As of three weeks ago.
Celia leans close to me. She smells like cinnamon. Come on come on come on. You got
to live it up a little before you settle down with Mr. Librarian Man. Come oooooonnnn,
Clare. Before you know it you be up to your ears in Librarian babies shitting their Pampers
full of that Dewey decimal system.
I really dont think
Then dont say nothin, just come on. Celia is packing up my books and manages to
knock over the little pitcher of milk. I start to mop it up but Celia just marches out of the cafe
holding my books. I rush after her.
Celia, dont, I need those For someone with short legs and five-inch heels shes
moving fast.
Uh-uh, Im not giving em back till you promise youre coming with me.
Ingrid wont like it. We are walking in step, heading south on Halstead toward
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
173
Belmont. I dont want to see Ingrid. The first and last time I saw her was the Violent Femmes
concert and thats fine with me.
Course she will. Ingrids been very curious about you. We turn onto Belmont, walk
past tattoo parlors, Indian restaurants, leather shops and storefront churches. We walk under
the El and theres Berlin. It doesnt look too enticing on the outside; the windows are painted
black and I can hear disco pulsating from the darkness behind the skinny freckled guy who
cards me but not Celia, stamps our hands and suffers us to enter the abyss.
As my eyes adjust I realize that the entire place is full of women. Women are crowded
around the tiny stage watching a female stripper strutting in a red sequined G-string and
pasties. Women are laughing and flirting at the bar. Its Ladies Night. Celia is pulling me
toward a table. Ingrid is sitting there by herself with a tall glass of sky blue liquid in front of
her. She looks up and I can tell that shes not too pleased to see me. Celia kisses Ingrid and
waves me to a chair. I remain standing.
Hey, baby, Celia says to Ingrid.
Youve got to be kidding, says Ingrid. What did you bring her for? They both ignore
me. Celia still has her arms wrapped around my books.
Its cool, Ingrid, shes all right. I thought yall might want to become better acquainted,
thats all. Celia seems almost apologetic, but even I can see that shes enjoying Ingrids
discomfort.
Ingrid glares at me. Why did you come? To gloat? She leans back in her chair and tilts
her chin up. Ingrid looks like a blond vampire, black
velvet jacket and blood red lips. She is ravishing. I feel like a small-town school girl. I
hold out my hands to Celia and she gives me my books.
I was coerced. Im leaving now. I begin to turn away but Ingrid shoots out a hand and
grabs my arm.
Wait a minute She wrenches my left hand toward her, and I stumble and my books
go flying. I pull my hand back and Ingrid says, youre engaged? and I realize that shes
looking at Henrys ring.
I say nothing. Ingrid turns to Celia. You knew, didnt you? Celia looks down at the
table, says nothing. You brought her here to rub it in, you bitch. Her voice is quiet. I can
hardly hear her over the pulsing music.
No, Ing, I just
Fuck you, Celia. Ingrid stands up. For a moment her face is close to mine and I imagine
Henry kissing those red lips. Ingrid stares at me. She says, You tell Henry he can go to hell.
And tell him Ill see him there. She stalks out. Celia is sitting with her face in her hands.
I begin to gather up my books. As I turn to go Celia says, Wait.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
174
I wait.
Celia says, Im sorry, Clare. I shrug. I walk to the door, and when I turn back I see that
Celia is sitting alone at the table, sipping Ingrids blue drink and leaning her face against her
hand. She is not looking at me.
Out on the street I walk faster and faster until I am at my car, and then I drive home and I
go to my room and I lie on my bed and I dial Henrys number but hes not home and I turn
out the light but I dont sleep.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
175
BETTER LIVING THROUGH CHEMISTRY
Sunday, September 5, 1993 (Clare is 22, Henry is 30)
CLARE: Henry is perusing his dog-eared copy of the Physicians Desk Reference. Not a good
sign.
I never realized you were such a drug fiend.
Im not a drug fiend. Im an alcoholic.
Youre not an alcoholic
Sure I am.
I lie down on his couch and put my legs across his lap. Henry puts the book on top of my
shins and continues to page through it.
You dont drink all that much.
I used to. I slowed down somewhat after I almost killed myself. Also my dad is a sad
cautionary tale.
What are you looking for?
Something I can take for the wedding. I dont want to leave you standing at the altar in
front of four hundred people.
Yeah. Good idea. I ponder this scenario and shudder. Lets elope.
He meets my eyes. Lets. Im all for it.
My parents would disown me.
Surely not.
You havent been paying attention. This is a major Broadway production. We are just an
excuse for my dad to entertain lavishly and impress all his lawyer buddies. If we bowed out
my parents would have to hire actors to impersonate us.
Lets go down to City Hall and get married beforehand. Then if anything happens, at
least well be married.
Oh, but.. .1 wouldnt like that. It would be lying.. .1 would feel weird. How about we do
that after, if the real wedding gets messed up?
Okay. Plan B. He holds out his hand, and I shake it.
So are you finding anything?
Well, ideally I would like a neuroleptic called Risperdal, but it wont be marketed until
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
176
1994. The next best thing would be Clozaril, and a possible third choice would be Haldol.
They all sound like high-tech cough medicine.
Theyre antipsychotics.
Seriously?
Yes.
Youre not psychotic.
Henry looks at me and makes a horrible face and claws at the air like a silent movie
werewolf. Then he says, quite seriously, On an EEG, I have the brain of a schizophrenic.
More than one doctor has insisted that this little time-travel delusion of mine is due to
schizophrenia. These drugs block dopamine receptors.
Side effects?
Well.. .dystonia, akathisia, pseudo-Parkinsonism. That is, involuntary muscle
contractions, restlessness, rocking, pacing, insomnia, immobility, lack of facial expression.
And then theres tardive dyskinsia, chronic uncontrollable facial muscles, and
agranulocytosis, the destruction of the bodys ability to make white blood cells. And then
theres the loss of sexual function. And the fact that all the drugs that are currently available
are somewhat sedative.
Youre not seriously thinking of taking any of these, are you?
Well, Ive taken Haldol in the past. And Thorazine.
And..,?
Really horrible. I was totally zombified. It felt like my brain was full of Elmers Glue.
Isnt there anything else?
Valium. Librium. Xanax.
Mama takes those. Xanax and Valium.
Yeah, that would make sense. He makes a face and sets the Physicians Desk Reference
aside and says, Move over. We adjust our positions on the couch until we are lying side by
side. Its very cozy.
Dont take anything.
Why not?
Youre not sick.
Henry laughs. Thats what I love you for: your inability to perceive all my hideous
flaws. Hes unbuttoning my shirt and I wrap my hand around his. He looks at me, waiting. I
am a little angry.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
177
I dont understand why you talk like that. Youre always saying horrible things about
yourself. You arent like that. Youre good.
Henry looks at my hand and disengages his, and draws me closer. Im not good, he says
softly, in my ear. But maybe I will be, hmmm?
You better be.
Im good to you. Too true. Clare?
Hmmm?
Do you ever lie awake wondering if Im some kind of joke God is playing on you?
No. I lie awake worrying that you might disappear and never come back. I lie awake
brooding about some of the stuff I sort of half know about in the future. But I have total faith
in the idea that we are supposed to be together.
Total faith.
Dont you?
Henry kisses me.  Nor Time, nor Place, nor Chance, nor Death can bow/my least
desires unto the least remove.
Come again?
I dont mind if I do.
Braggart.
Now whos saying horrible things about me?
Monday, September 6, 1993 (Henry is 30)
HENRY: Im sitting on the stoop of a dingy white aluminum-sided house in Humboldt Park.
Its Monday morning, around ten. Im waiting for Ben to get back from wherever he is. I
dont like this neighborhood very much; I feel kind of exposed sitting here at Bens door, but
hes an extremely punctual guy, so I continue to wait with confidence. I watch two young
Hispanic women push baby strollers along the pitched and broken sidewalk. As I meditate on
the inequity of city services, I hear someone yell Library Boy! in the distance. I look in the
direction of the voice and sure enough, its Gomez. I groan inwardly; Gomez has an amazing
talent for running into me when Im up to something particularly nefarious. I will have to get
rid of him before Ben shows up.
Gomez comes sailing toward me happily. Hes wearing his lawyer outfit, and carrying his
briefcase. I sigh.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
178
 Qa va, comrade.
 Qa va. What are you doing here?
Good question. Waiting on a friend. What time is it?
Quarter after ten. September 6,1993, he adds helpfully. I know, Gomez. But thanks
anyway. You visiting a client?
Yeah. Ten-year-old girl. Moms boyfriend made her drink Drano. I do get tired of
humans.
Yeah. Too many maniacs, not enough Michelangelos.
You had lunch? Or breakfast, I guess it would be?
Yeah. I kind of need to stay here, wait for my friend.
I didnt know any of your friends lived out this way. All the people I know over here are
sadly in need of legal counsel.
Friend from library school. And here he is. Ben drives up in his 62 silver Mercedes.
The inside is a wreck, but from the outside its a sweet-looking car. Gomez whistles softly.
Sorry Im late, Ben says, hurrying up the walk. Housecall. Gomez looks at me
inquisitively. I ignore him. Ben looks at Gomez, and at me.
Gomez, Ben. Ben, Gomez. So sorry you have to leave, comrade.
Actually, Ive got a couple hours free
Ben takes the situation in hand. Gomez. Great meeting you. Some other time, yes? Ben
is quite nearsighted, and he peers kindly at Gomez through his thick glasses that magnify his
eyes to twice their normal size. Bens jingling his keys in his hand. Its making me nervous.
We both stand quietly, waiting for Gomez to leave. Okay. Yeah. Well, bye, says Gomez.
Ill call you this afternoon I tell him. He turns without looking at me and walks away. I
feel bad, but there are things I dont want Gomez to know, and this is one of them. Ben and I
turn to each other, share a look that acknowledges the fact that we know things about each
other that are problematic. He opens his front door. I have always itched to try my hand at
breaking into Bens place, because he has a large number and variety of locks and security
devices. We enter the dark narrow hall. It always smells like cabbage in here, even though I
know for a fact that Ben never cooks much in the way of food, let alone cabbage. We walk to
the back stairway, up and into another hallway, through one bedroom and into another,
which Ben has set up as a lab. He sets down his bag and hangs up his jacket. I half expect
him to put on some tennis shoes, a la Mr. Rogers, but instead he putters around with his
coffee maker. I sit down on a folding chair and wait for Ben to finish.
More than anyone else I know, Ben looks like a librarian. And I did in fact meet him at
Rosary, but he quit before finishing his MLS. He has gotten thinner since I saw him last, and
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
179
lost a little more hair. Ben has AIDS, and every time I see him I pay attention, because I
never know how it will go, with him.
Youre looking good  I tell him.
Massive doses of AZT. And vitamins, and yoga, and visual imaging. Speaking of which.
What can I do for you?
Im getting married.
Ben is surprised, and then delighted. Congratulations. To whom?
Clare. You met her. The girl with very long red hair.
Ohyes. Ben looks grave. She knows?
Yes.
Well, great. He gives me a look that says that this is all very nice, but what of it?
So her parents have planned this huge wedding, up in Michigan. Church, bridesmaids,
rice, the whole nine yards. And a lavish reception at the Yacht Club, afterward. White tie, no
less.
Ben pours out coffee and hands me a mug with Winnie the Pooh on it. I stir powdered
creamer into it. Its cold up here, and the coffee smells bitter but kind of good.
I need to be there. I need to get through about eight hours of huge, mind-boggling stress,
without disappearing.
Ah. Ben has a way of taking in a problem, just accepting it, which I find very soothing.
I need something thats going to K.O. every dopamine receptor Ive got.
Navane, Haldol, Thorazine, Serentil, Mellaril, Stelazine... Ben polishes his glasses on
his sweater. He looks like a large hairless mouse without them.
I was hoping you could make this for me. I fish around in my jeans for the paper, find it
and hand it over. Ben squints at it, reads.
3-[2-[4-96-fluoro-l,2-benizisoxazol-3-yl)...colloidal silicon dioxide, hydroxypropyl
methylcellulose.. .propylene glycol He looks up at me, bewildered. What is this?
Its a new antipsychotic called risperidone, marketed as Risperdal. It will be
commercially available in 1998, but I would like to try it now. It belongs to a new class of
drugs called benzisoxazole derivatives.
Where did you get this?
PDR. The 2000 edition.
Who makes it?
Janssen.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
180
Henry, you know you dont tolerate antipsycotics very well. Unless this works in some
radically different way?
They dont know how it works. Selective monoaminergic antagonist with high affinity
for serotonin type 2, dopamine type 2, blah blah blah.
Well, same old same old. What makes you think this is going to be any better than
Haldol?
I smile patiently. Its an educated guess. I dont know for sure. Can you make that?
Ben hesitates. I can, yes
How soon? It takes a while to build up in the system.
Ill let you know. Whens the wedding?
October 23 
Mmm. Whats the dosage?
Start with 1 milligram and build from there.
Ben stands up, stretches. In the dim light of this cold room he seems old, jaundiced,
paper-skinned. Part of Ben likes the challenge (hey, lets replicate this avant-garde drug that
nobodys even invented yet) and part of him doesnt like the risk. Henry, you dont even
know for sure that dopamines your problem.
Youve seen the scans.
Yeah, yeah. Why not just live with it? The cure might be worse than the problem.
Ben. What if I snapped my fingers right now I stand up, lean close to him, snap my
fingers: and right now you suddenly found yourself standing in Allens bedroom, in 1986

Id kill the fucker.
But you cant, because you didnt. Ben closes his eyes, shakes his head. And you cant
change anything: he will still get sick, you will still get sick, und so wiete. What if you had to
watch him die over and over? Ben sits in the folding chair. Hes not looking at me. Thats
what its like, Ben. I mean, yeah, sometimes its fun. But mostly its getting lost and stealing
and trying to just....
Cope. Ben sighs. God, I dont know why I put up with you.
Novelty? My boyish good looks?
Dream on. Hey, am I invited to this wedding?
I am startled. It never occurred to me that Ben would want to come. Yeah! Really? You
would come?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
181
Beats funerals.
Great! My side of the church is filling up rapidly. Youll be my eighth guest.
Ben laughs. Invite all your ex-girlfriends. Thatll swell the ranks.
Id never survive it. Most of them want my head on a stick.
Mmm . Ben gets up and rummages in one of his desk drawers. He pulls out an empty
pill bottle and opens another drawer, takes out a huge bottle of capsules, opens it and places
three pills in the small bottle. He tosses it to me.
What is it? I ask, opening the bottle and shaking a pill onto my palm.
Its an endorphin stabilizer combined with an antidepressant. Its hey, dont I have
popped the pill into my mouth and swallowed. Its morphine-based. Ben sighs. You have
the most casually arrogant attitude toward drugs.
I like opiates.
I bet. Dont think Im going to let you have a ton of those, either. Let me know if you
think that would do the job for the wedding. In case this other thing doesnt pan out. They
last about four hours, so you would need two. Ben nods at the two remaining pills. Dont
gobble those up just for fun, okay?
Scouts honor.
Ben snorts. I pay him for the pills and leave. As I walk downstairs I feel the rush grab me
and I stop at the bottom of the stairs to luxuriate in it. Its been a while. Whatever Ben has
mixed in here, its fantastic. Its like an orgasm times ten plus cocaine, and it seems to be
getting stronger. As I walk out the front door I practically trip over Gomez. Hes been
waiting for me.
Care for a ride?
Sure. I am deeply moved by his concern. Or his curiosity. Or whatever. We walk to his
car, a Chevy Nova with two bashed headlights. I climb into the passenger seat. Gomez gets
in and slams his door. He coaxes the little car into starting and we set off.
The city is gray and dingy and its starting to rain. Fat drops smack the windshield as
crack houses and empty lots flow by us. Gomez turns on NPR and theyre playing Charles
Mingus who sounds a little slow to me but then again why not? its a free country. Ashland
Avenue is full of brain-jarring potholes but otherwise things are fine, quite fine actually, my
head is fluid and mobile, like liquid mercury escaped from a broken thermometer, and its all
I can do to keep myself from moaning with pleasure as the drug laps all my nerve endings
with its tiny chemical tongues. We pass ESP Psychic Card Reader, Pedros Tire Outlet,
Burger King, Pizza Hut, and I am a Passenger runs through my head weaving its way into
the Mingus. Gomez says something which I dont catch and then again,
Henry!
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
182
Yes?
What are you on?
Im not quite sure. A science experiment, of sorts.
Why?
Stellar question. Ill get back to you on that.
We dont say anything else until the car stops in front of Clare and Charisses apartment. I
look at Gomez in confusion.
You need company, he tells me gently. I dont disagree. Gomez lets us in the front door
and we walk upstairs. Clare opens the door and when she sees me she looks upset, relieved,
and amused, all at once.
CLARE: I have talked Henry into getting into my bed, and Gomez and I are sitting in the
living room drinking tea and eating peanut butter and kiwi jelly sandwiches.
Learn to cook, woman, intones Gomez. He sounds like Charleton Heston handing down
the Ten Commandments.
One of these days. I stir sugar into my tea. Thank you for going and getting him.
Anything for you, kitten. He starts to roll a cigarette. Gomez is the only person I know
who smokes during a meal. I refrain from commenting. He lights up. He looks at me, and I
brace myself. So, what was that little episode all about, hmm? Most of the people who go to
Compassionate Pharmacopoeia are AIDS victims or cancer patients.
You know Ben? I dont know why Im surprised. Gomez knows everybody.
I know of Ben. My mom used to go to Ben when she was having chemo.
Oh. I review the situation, searching for things I can safely mention.
Whatever Ben gave him really put him in the Slow Zone.
Were trying to find something that will help Henry stay in the present.
He seems a little too inanimate for daily use.
Yeah. Maybe a lower dosage?
Why are you doing this?
Doing what?
Aiding and abetting Mr. Mayhem. Marrying him, no less.
Henry calls my name. I get up. Gomez reaches out and grabs my hand.
Clare. Please
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
183
Gomez. Let go. I stare him down. After a long, awful moment he drops his eyes and lets
me go. I hurry down the hall into my room and shut the door.
Henry is stretched out like a cat, diagonally across the bed face down. I take off my shoes
and stretch out beside him.
Hows it going? I ask him.
Henry rolls over and smiles. Heaven. He strokes my face. Care to join me? No.
Henry sighs. You are so good. I shouldnt be trying to corrupt you.
Im not good. Im afraid. We lie together in silence for a long time. The sun is shining
now, and it shows me my bedroom in early afternoon: the curve of the walnut bed frame, the
gold and violet Oriental rug, the hairbrush and lipstick and bottle of hand lotion on the
bureau. A copy of Art in America with Leon Golub on the cover lies on the seat of my old
garage-sale armchair partially obscured by A Rebours. Henry is wearing black socks. His
long bony feet hang off the edge of the bed. He seems thin to me. Henrys eyes are closed;
perhaps he can feel me staring at him, because he opens his eyes and smiles at me. His hair is
falling into his face and I brush it back. Henry takes my hand and kisses the palm. I unbutton
his jeans and slide my hand over his cock, but Henry shakes his head and takes my hand and
holds it.
Sorry, Clare, he says softly. Theres something in this stuff that seems to have shortcircuited
the equipment. Later, maybe.
Thatll be fun on our wedding night.
Henry shakes his head. I cant take this for the wedding. Its too much fun. I mean, Bens
a genius, but hes used to working with people who are terminally ill. Whatever hes got in
here, it plays like a near-death experience. He sighs and sets the pill bottle on my
nightstand. I should mail those to Ingrid. This is her perfect drug. I hear the front door
open and then it slams shut; Gomez leaving.
You want something to eat? I ask.
No thanks.
Is Ben going to make that other drug for you?
Hes going to try, Henry says.
What if its not right?
You mean if Ben fucks up?
Yeah.
Henry says, Whatever happens, we both know that I live to be at least forty-three. So
dont worry about it.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
184
Forty-three? What happens after forty-three?
I dont know, Clare. Maybe I figure out how to stay in the present. He gathers me in
and we are quiet. When I wake up later it is dark and Henry is sleeping beside me. The little
bottle of pills shines red in the light f the LED display of the alarm clock. Forty-three?
Monday, September 27, 1993 (Clare is 22, Henry is 30)
CLARE: I let myself into Henrys apartment and turn on the lights. Were going to the opera
tonight; its The Ghosts of Versailles. The Lyric Opera wont seat latecomers, so Im
flustered and at first I dont realize that no lights means Henry isnt here. Then I do realize it,
and Im annoyed because hes going to make us late. Then I wonder if hes gone. Then I hear
someone breathing.
I stand still. The breathing is coming from the kitchen, I run into the kitchen and turn on
the light and Henry is lying on the floor, fully clothed, in a strange, rigid pose, staring
straight ahead. As I stand there he makes a low sound, not like a human sound, a groan that
clatters in his throat, that tears through his clenched teeth.
Oh, God, oh, God. I call 911. The operator assures me theyll be here in minutes. And
as I sit on the kitchen floor staring at Henry I feel a wave of anger and I find Henrys
Rolodex in his desk and I dial the number.
Hello? The voice is tiny and distant.
Is this Ben Matteson?
Yes. Who is this?
Clare Abshire. Listen, Ben, Henry is lying on the floor totally rigid and cant talk. What
the fuck?
What? Shit! Call 911!
I did
The drug is mimicking Parkinsons, he needs dopamine! Tell them shit, call me from
the hospital
Theyre here
Okay! Call me I hang up, and face the paramedics.
Later, after the ambulance ride to Mercy Hospital, after Henry has been admitted,
injected, and intubated and is lying in a hospital bed attached to a monitor, relaxed and
sleeping, I look up and see a tall gaunt man in the doorway of Henrys room, and I remember
that I have forgotten to call Ben. He walks in and stands across from me on the other side of
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
185
the bed. The room is dark and the light from the hallway silhouettes Ben as he bows his head
and says, Im so sorry. So sorry.
I reach across the bed, take his hands. Its okay. Hes going to be fine. Really
Ben shakes his head. Its completely my fault. I should never have made it for him.
What happened?
Ben sighs and sits down in the chair. I sit on the bed. It could be several things, he says.
It could be just a side effect, could happen to anybody. But it could be that Henry didnt
have the recipe quite right. I mean, its a lot to memorize. And I couldnt check it.
We are both silent. Henrys monitor drips fluid into his arm. An orderly walks by with a
cart. Finally I say, Ben?
Yes, Clare?
Do something for me?
Anything.
Cut him off. No more drugs. Drugs arent going to work.
Ben grins at me, relieved. Just say no.
Exactly. We laugh. Ben sits with me for a while. When he gets up to leave, he takes my
hand and says, Thank you for being kind about it. He could easily have died.
But he didnt.
No, he didnt.
See you at the wedding.
Yes. We are standing in the hall. In the glaring fluorescent light Ben looks tired and ill.
He ducks his head and turns, and walks down the hall, and I turn back to the dim room where
Henry lies sleeping.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
186
TURNING POINT
Friday, October 22, 1993 (Henry is 30)
HENRY: I am strolling down Linden Street, in South Haven, at large for an hour while Clare
and her mother do something at the florists. The wedding is tomorrow, but as the groom I
dont seem to have too many responsibilities. Be there; thats the main item on my To Do
list. Clare is constantly being whisked away to fittings, consultations, bridal showers. When I
do see her she always looks rather wistful.
Its a clear cold day, and I dawdle. I wish South Haven had a decent bookstore. Even the
library consists mainly of Barbara Cartland and John Grisham. I have the Penguin edition of
Kleist with me, but Im not in the mood. I pass an antiques shop, a bakery, a bank, another
antiques shop. As I walk by the barber shop I peer in; theres an old man being shaved by a
dapper little balding barber, and I know at once what Im going to do.
Little bells clang against the door as I walk into the shop. It smells of soap, steam, hair
lotion, and elderly flesh. Everything is pale green. The chair is old and ornate with chrome,
and there are elaborate bottles lining dark wooden shelves, and trays of scissors, combs, and
razors. Its almost
medical; its very Norman Rockwell. The barber glances up at me. Haircut? I ask. He
nods at the row of empty straight-backed chairs with magazines neatly stacked on a rack at
one end of the row. Sinatra is playing on the radio. I sit down and leaf through a copy of
Readers Digest. The barber wipes traces of lather from the old mans chin, and applies
aftershave. The old man climbs gingerly from the chair and pays up. The barber helps him
into his coat and hands him his cane. See you, George, says the old man as he creeps out.
Bye, Ed, replies the barber. He turns his attention to me. Whatll it be? I hop into the
chair and he steps me up a few inches and swivels me around to face the mirror. I take a long
last look at my hair. I hold my thumb and forefinger about an inch apart. Cut it all off. He
nods his approval and ties a plastic cape around my neck. Soon his scissors are flashing little
metal on metal noises around my head, and my hair is falling to the floor. When he is done
he brushes me off and removes the cape and voila, Ive become the me of my future.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
187
GET ME TO THE CHURCH ON TIME
Saturday, October 23, 1993 (Henry is 30, Clare is 22) (6:00 a.m.)
HENRY: I wake up at 6:00 a.m. and its raining. I am in a snug little green room under the
eaves in a cozy little bed-and-breakfast called Blakes, which is right on the south beach in
South Haven. Clares parents have chosen this place; my dad is sleeping in an equally cozy
pink room downstairs, next to Mrs. Kim in a lovely yellow room; Grandpa and Grams are in
the uber-cozy blue master bedroom. I lie in the extra-soft bed under Laura Ashley sheets, and
I can hear the wind flinging itself against the house. The rain is pouring down in sheets. I
wonder if I can run in this monsoon. I hear it coursing through the gutters and drumming on
the roof, which is about two feet above my face. This room is like a garret. It has a delicate
little writing desk, in case I need to pen any ladylike missives on my wedding day. Theres a
china ewer and basin on the bureau; if I actually wanted to use them Id probably have to
break the ice on the water first, because its quite cold up here. I feel like a pink worm in the
core of this green room, as though I have eaten my way in and should be working on
becoming a butterfly, or something. Im not real awake, here, at the moment. I hear
somebody coughing. I hear my heart beating and the high-pitched sound which is my
nervous system doing its thing. Oh, God, let today be a normal day. Let me be normally
befuddled, normally nervous; get me to the church on time, in time. Let me not startle
anyone, especially myself. Let me get through our wedding day as best I can, with no special
effects. Deliver Clare from unpleasant scenes. Amen.
(7:00 a.m.)
CLARE: I wake up in my bed, the bed of my childhood. As I float on the surface of waking I
cant find myself in time; is it Christmas, Thanksgiving? Is it third grade, again? Am I sick?
Why is it raining? Outside the yellow curtains the sky is dead and the big elm tree is being
stripped of its yellow leaves by the wind. I have been dreaming all night. The dreams merge,
now. In one part of this dream I was swimming in the ocean, I was a mermaid. I was sort of
new at being a mermaid and one of the other mermaids was trying to teach me; she was
giving me mermaid lessons. I was afraid to breathe under water. The water got into my lungs
and I couldnt figure out how it was supposed to work, it felt terrible and I kept having to rise
up to the surface and breathe and the other mermaid kept saying, No, Clare, like this.. .until
finally I realized that she had gills in her neck, and I did too, and then it was better.
Swimming was like flying, all the fish were birds...There was a boat on the surface of the
ocean, and we all swam up to see the boat. It was just a little sailboat, and my mother was on
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
188
it, all by herself. I swam up to her and she was surprised to see me there, she said Why Clare,
I thought you were getting married today, and I suddenly realized, the way you do in dreams,
that I couldnt get married to Henry if I was a mermaid, and I started to cry, and then I woke
up and it was the middle of the night. So I lay there for a while in the dark and I made up that
I became a regular woman, like the Little Mermaid except I didnt have any of that nonsense
about hideous pain in my feet or getting my tongue cut out. Hans Christian Andersen must
have been a very strange and sad person. Then I went back to sleep and now I am in bed and
Henry and I are getting married today.
(7:16 a.m.)
HENRY: The ceremony is at 2:00 p.m. and it will take me about half an hour to dress and
twenty minutes for us to drive over to St. Basils. It is now 7:16 a.m., which leaves five hours
and forty-four minutes to kill. I throw on jeans and a skanky old flannel shirt and high-tops
and creep as quietly as possible downstairs seeking coffee. Dad has beat me to it; hes sitting
in the breakfast room with his hands wrapped around a dainty cup of steaming black joe. I
pour one for myself and sit across from him. Through the lace-curtained windows the weak
light gives Dad a ghostly look; hes a colorized version of a black and white movie of
himself this morning. His hair is standing up every which way and without thinking I smooth
mine down, as though he were a mirror. He does the same, and we smile.
(8:17 a.m.)
CLARE: Alicia is sitting on my bed, poking me. Come on, Clare, she pokes. Daylight in
the swamp. The birds are singing, (quite untrue) and the frogs are jumping and its time to
get up! Alicia is tickling me. She throws off the covers and we are wrestling and just as I
pin her Etta sticks her head in the door and hisses Girls! What is all this bumping. Your
father, he thinks a tree fell on the house, but no, it is you sillies trying to kill each other.
Breakfast is almost ready. With that Etta abruptly withdraws her head and we hear her
barging down the stairs as we dissolve into laughter.
(8:32 a.m.)
HENRY: Its still blowing gales out there but I am going running anyway. I study the map of
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
189
South Haven (A shining jewel on the Sunset Coast of Lake Michigan!) which Clare has
provided me with. Yesterday I ran along the beach, which was pleasant but not something to
do this morning. I can see six-foot-tall waves throwing themselves at the shore. I measure out
a mile of streets and figure I will run laps; if its too awful out there I can cut it short. I
stretch out. Every joint pops. I can almost hear tension crackling in my nerves like static in a
phone line. I get dressed, and out into the world I go.
The rain is a slap in the face. I am drenched immediately. I soldier slowly down Maple
Street. Its just going to be a slog; I am fighting the wind and theres no way to get up any
speed. I pass a woman standing at the curb with her bulldog and she looks at me with
amazement. This isnt mere exercise, I tell her silently. This is desperation.
(8:54 a.m.)
CLARE: Were gathered around the breakfast table. Cold leaks in from all the windows, and I
can barely see outside, its raining so hard. How is Henry going to run in this?
Perfect weather for a wedding, Mark jokes.
I shrug.  I didnt pick it.
You didnt?
 Daddy picked it.
Well, Im paying for it, Daddy says petulantly.
True. I munch my toast.
My mother eyes my plate critically. Honey, why dont you have some nice bacon? And
some of these eggs?
The very thought turns my stomach. I cant. Really. Please.
Well, at least put some peanut butter on that toast. You need protein. I make eye contact
with Etta, who strides into the kitchen and comes back a minute later with a tiny crystal dish
full of peanut butter. I thank her and spread some on the toast.
I ask my mother, Do I have any time before Janice shows up? Janice is going to do
something hideous to my face and hair.
Shes coming at eleven. Why?
I need to run into Town, to get something.
I can get it for you, sweetie. She looks relieved at the thought of getting out of the
house.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
190
I would like to go, myself.
We can both go.
By myself. I mutely plead with her. Shes puzzled but relents.
Well, okay. Goodness.
Great. Ill be right back. I get up to leave. Daddy clears his throat.
May I be excused?
Certainly.
Thank you. I flee.
(9:35 a.m.)
HENRY: Im standing in the immense, empty bathtub struggling out of my cold, soaked
clothes. My brand new running shoes have acquired an entirely new shape, reminiscent of
marine life. I have left a trail of water from the front door to the tub, which I hope Mrs. Blake
wont mind too much.
Someone knocks on my door. Just a minute, I call. I squoosh over to the door and crack
it open. To my complete surprise, its Clare. Whats the password? I say softly.
Fuck me, replies Clare. I swing the door wide.
Clare walks in, sits on the bed, and starts taking off her shoes.
Youre not joking?
Come on, O almost-husband mine. Ive got to be back by eleven. She looks me up and
down. You went running! I didnt think youd run in this rain.
Desperate times call for desperate measures. I peel off my T-shirt and throw it into the
tub. It lands with a splat. Isnt it supposed to be bad luck for the groom to see the bride
before the wedding?
So close your eyes. Clare trots into the bathroom and grabs a towel. I lean over and she
dries my hair. It feels wonderful. I could do with a lifetime of this. Yes, indeed.
Its really cold up here, says Clare.
Come and be bedded, almost-wife. Its the only warm spot in the whole place. We
climb in.
We do everything out of order, dont we?
You have a problem with that?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
191
No. I like it.
Good. Youve come to the right man for all your extra-chronological needs.
(11:15 a.m.)
CLARE: I walk in the back door and leave my umbrella in the mud room. In the hall I almost
bump into Alicia. Where have you been? Janice is here.
What time is it?
Eleven-fifteen. Hey, youve got your shirt on backward and inside out.
I think thats good luck, isnt it?
Maybe, but youd better change it before you go upstairs. I duck back into the mud
room and reverse my shirt. Then I run upstairs. Mama and Janice are standing in the hall
outside my room. Janice is carrying a huge bag of cosmetics and other implements of torture.
There you are. I was getting worried. Mama shepherds me into my room and Janice
brings up the rear. I have to go talk to the caterers. She is almost wringing her hands as she
departs.
I turn to Janice, who examines me critically. Your hairs all wet and tangled. Why dont
you comb it out while I set up? She starts to take a million tubes and bottles from her bag
and sets them on my dresser.
Janice. I hand her the postcard from the Uffizi. Can you do this? I have always loved
the little Medici princess whose hair is not unlike mine; hers has many tiny braids and pearls
all swooped together in a beautiful fall of amber hair. The anonymous artist must have loved
her, too. How could he not love her?
Janice considers. This isnt what your mom thinks were doing.
Uh-huh. But its my wedding. And my hair. And Ill give you a very large tip if you do it
my way.
I wont have time to do your face if we do this; itll take too long to do all these braids.
Hallelujah. Its okay. Ill put on my own makeup.
Well, all right. Just comb it for me and well get started. I begin to pick out the tangles.
Im starting to enjoy this. As I surrender to Janices slender brown hands I wonder what
Henry is up to.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
192
(11:36 a.m.)
HENRY: The tux and all its attendant miseries are laid out on the bed. Im freezing my
undernourished ass off in this cold room. I throw all my cold wet clothing out of the tub and
into the sink. This bathroom is amazingly as big as the bedroom. Its carpeted, and
relentlessly pseudoVictorian.
The tub is an immense claw-footed thing amid various ferns and stacks of
towels and a commode and a large framed reproduction of Hunts The Awakened
Conscience. The windowsill is six inches from the floor and the curtains are filmy white
muslin, so I can see Maple Street in all its dead leafy glory. A beige Lincoln Continental
cruises lazily up the street. I run hot water into the tub, which is so large that I get tired of
waiting for it to fill and climb in. I amuse myself playing with the European-style shower
attachment and taking the caps off the ten or so shampoos, shower gels, and conditioners and
sniffing them all; by the fifth one I have a headache. I sing Yellow Submarine. Everything
within a four-foot radius gets wet.
(12:35p.m.)
CLARE: Janice releases me, and Mama and Etta converge. Etta says, Oh, Clare, you look
beautiful! Mama says, Thats not the hairstyle we agreed on, Clare. Mama gives Janice a
hard time and then pays her and I give Janice her tip when Mamas not looking. Im
supposed to get dressed at the church, so they pack me into the car and we drive over to St.
Basils.
(12:55p.m.) (Henry is 38)
HENRY: Im walking along Highway 12, about two miles south of South Haven. Its an
unbelievably awful day, weather-wise. Its fall, rain is gusting and pouring down in sheets,
and its cold and windy. Im wearing nothing but jeans, Im barefoot, and I am soaked to the
skin. I have no idea where I am in time. Im headed for Meadowlark House, hoping to dry
out in the Reading Room and maybe eat something. I have no money, but when I see the
pink neon light of the Cut-Rate Gas for Less sign I veer toward it. I enter the gas station and
stand for a moment, streaming water onto the linoleum and catching my breath.
Quite a day to be out in  says the thin elderly gent behind the counter.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
193
Yep  I reply.
Car break down?
Huh? Um, no. Hes taking a good look at me, noting the bare feet, the unseasonable
clothing. I pause, feign embarrassment. Girlfriend threw me out of the house.
He says something but I dont hear it because I am looking at the South Haven Daily.
Today is Saturday, October 23,1993. Our wedding day. The clock above the cigarette rack
says 1:10.
Gotta run, I say to the old man, and I do.
(1:42 p.m.)
CLARE: Im standing in my fourth grade classroom wearing my wedding dress. Its ivory
watered silk with lots of lace and seed pearls. The dress is tightly fitted in the bodice and
arms but the skirt is huge, floor-length with a train and twenty yards of fabric. I could hide
ten midgets under it. I feel like a parade float, but Mama is making much of me; shes
fussing and taking pictures and trying to get me to put on more makeup. Alicia and Charisse
and Helen and Ruth are all fluttering around in their matching sage green velvet bridesmaids
outfits. Since Charisse and Ruth are both short and Alicia and Helen are both tall they look
like some oddly assorted Girl Scouts but weve all agreed to be cool about it when Mamas
around. They are comparing the dye jobs on their shoes and arguing about who should get to
catch the bouquet. Helen says, Charisse, youre already engaged, you shouldnt even be
trying to catch it, and Charisse shrugs and says, Insurance. With Gomez you never know.
(1:48 p.m.)
HENRY: Im sitting on a radiator in a musty room full of boxes of prayer books. Gomez is
pacing back and forth, smoking. He looks terrific in his tux. I feel like Im impersonating a
game show host. Gomez paces and flicks his ashes into a teacup. Hes making me even more
nervous than I already am.
Youve got the ring? I ask for the gazillionth time.
Yeah. Ive got the ring.
He stops pacing for a moment and looks at me. Want a drink?
Yeah. Gomez produces a flask and hands it to me. I uncap it and take a swallow. Its
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
194
very smooth Scotch. I take another mouthful and hand it back. I can hear people laughing
and talking out in the vestibule. Im sweating, and my head aches. The room is very warm. I
stand up and open the window, hang my head out, breathe. Its still raining.
Theres a noise in the shrubbery. I open the window farther and look down. There I am,
sitting in the dirt, under the window, soaking wet, panting. He grins at me and gives me the
thumbs up.
(1:55 p.m.)
CLARE: Were all standing in the vestibule of the church. Daddy says, Lets get this show
on the road, and knocks on the door of the room Henry is dressing in. Gomez sticks his head
out and says, Give us a minute. He throws me a look that makes my stomach clench and
pulls his head in and shuts the door. I am walking toward the door when Gomez opens it
again, and Henry appears, doing up his cuff links. Hes wet, dirty, and unshaven. He looks
about forty. But hes here, and he gives me a triumphant smile as he walks through the doors
of the church and down the aisle.
Sunday, June 13, 1976 (Henry is 30)
HENRY: I am lying on the floor in my old bedroom. Im alone, and its a perfect summer
night in an unknown year. I lie there swearing and feeling like an idiot for a while. Then I get
up and go into the kitchen and help myself to several of Dads beers.
Saturday, October 23, 1993 (Henry is 38, and 30, Clare is 22)
(2:37p.m.)
CLARE: We are standing at the altar. Henry turns to me and says, I, Henry, take you, Clare,
to be my wife. I promise to be true to you in good times and in bad, in sickness and in health.
I will love you and honor you all the days of my life. I think: remember this. I repeat the
promise to him. Father Compton smiles at us and says,.. .What God has joined, men must
not divide. I think: thats not really the problem. Henry slides the thin silver ring over my
finger into place above the engagement ring. I place his plain gold band on his finger, the
only time he will ever wear it. The Mass proceeds, and I think this is all that matters: hes
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
195
here, Im here, it doesnt matter how, as long as hes with me. Father Compton blesses us,
and says, The Mass is ended, go in peace. We walk down the aisle, arm in arm, together.
(6:26p.m.)
HENRY: The reception is just getting underway. The caterers are rushing back and forth with
steel carts and covered trays. People are arriving and checking their coats. The rain has
finally stopped. The South Haven Yacht Club is on North Beach, a 1920s building done up in
paneling and leather, red carpet, and paintings of ships. Its dark out now, but the lighthouse
is blinking away out on the pier. Im standing at a window, drinking Glenlivet,
waiting for Clare, who has been whisked away by her mother for some reason Im not privy
to. I see Gomez and Bens reflections, heading toward me, and I turn.
Ben looks worried. How are you?
Im okay. Can you guys do me a favor? They nod. Gomez, go back to the church. Im
there, waiting in the vestibule. Pick me up, and bring me here. Smuggle me into the
downstairs mens John and leave me there. Ben, keep an eye on me, (I point at my chest)
and when I tell you to, grab my tux and bring it to me in the mens room. Okay?
Gomez asks, How much time do we have?
Not much.
He nods, and walks away. Charisse approaches, and Gomez kisses her on the forehead
and continues on. I turn to Ben, who looks tired. How are you? I ask him.
Ben sighs. Kind of fatigued. Um, Henry?
Hmm?
When are you coming from?
2002.
Can you.. .Look, I know you dont like this, but...
What? Its okay, Ben. Whatever you want. Its a special occasion.
Tell me: am I still alive? Ben isnt looking at me; he stares at the band, tuning up in the
ballroom.
Yes. Youre doing fine. I just saw you a few days ago; we played pool.
Ben lets his breath out in a rush. Thank you.
No problem. Tears are welling up in Bens eyes. I offer him my handkerchief, and he
takes it, but then hands it back unused and goes off in search of the mens room.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
196
(7:04 p.m.)
CLARE: Everyone is sitting down to dinner and no one can find Henry. I ask Gomez if hes
seen him, and Gomez just gives me one of his Gomez looks and says that hes sure Henry
will be here any minute. Kimy comes up to us, looking very fragile and worried in her rose
silk dress. Where is Henry? she asks me.
I dont know, Kimy.
She pulls me toward her and whispers in my ear, I saw his young friend Ben carrying a
pile of clothing out of the Lounge. Oh, no. If Henry has snapped back to his present it will
be hard to explain. Maybe I could say that there was an emergency? Some kind of library
emergency that required Henrys immediate attention. But all his co-workers are here.
Maybe I could say Henry has amnesia, has wandered away....
There he is, Kimy says. She squeezes my hand. Henry is standing in the doorway
scanning the crowd, and sees us. He comes running over.
I kiss him. Howdy, stranger. He is back in the present, my younger Henry, the one who
belongs here. Henry takes my arm, and Kimys arm, and leads us in to dinner. Kimy
chuckles, and says something to Henry that I dont catch. Whatd she say? I ask as we sit
down. She asked me if we were planning a mnage a trois for the wedding night. I turn
lobster red. Kimy winks at me.
(7:16 p.m.)
HENRY: Im hanging out in the club Library, eating canaps and reading a sumptuously
bound and probably never opened first edition of Heart of Darkness. Out of the corner of my
eye I see the manager of the club speeding toward me. I close the book and replace it on the
shelf.
Im sorry, sir, Im afraid Ill have to ask you to leave. No shirt, no shoes, no service.
Okay. I stand up, and as the manager turns his back blood rushes to my head and I
vanish. I come to on our kitchen floor on March 2, 2002, laughing. Ive always wanted to do
that.
(7:21 p.m.)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
197
CLARE: Gomez is making a speech: Dear Clare, and Henry, family and friends, members of
the jury... wait, scratch that. Dearly beloved, we have gathered here this evening on the
shores of the Land of Singledom to wave our handkerchiefs at Clare and Henry as they
embark together on their voyage on the Good Ship Matrimony. And while we are sad to
watch them bid farewell to the joys of single life, we are confident that the much-ballyhooed
state of Wedded Bliss will be a more than adequate new address. Some of us may even join
them there shortly unless we can think of a way to avoid it. And so, let us have a toast: to
Clare Abshire DeTamble, a beautiful artbabe who deserves every happiness that may befall
her in her new world. And to Henry DeTamble, a damn fine fellow and a lucky son of a
bitch: may the Sea of Life stretch before you like glass, and may you always have the wind at
your backs. To the happy couple! Gomez leans over and kisses me on the mouth, and I
catch his eyes for a moment, and then the moment is gone.
(8:48 p.m.)
HENRY: We have cut and eaten the wedding cake. Clare has thrown her bouquet (Charisse
caught it) and I have thrown Clares garter (Ben, of all people, caught that). The band is
playing Take the A Train, and people are dancing. I have danced with Clare, and Kimy,
Alicia, and Charisse; now I am dancing with Helen, who is pretty hot stuff, and Clare is
dancing with Gomez. As I casually twirl Helen I see Celia Attley cut in on Gomez, who in
turn cuts in on me. As he whirls Helen away I join the crowd by the bar and watch Clare
dancing with Celia. Ben joins me. Hes drinking seltzer. I order vodka and tonic. Ben is
wearing Clares garter around his arm like hes in mourning.
Whos that? he asks me.
Celia Attley. Ingrids girlfriend.
Thats weird.
Yep.
Whats with that guy Gomez?
What do you mean?
Ben stares at me and then turns his head. Never mind.
(10:23 p.m.)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
198
CLARE: Its over. We have kissed and hugged our way out of the club, have driven off in our
shaving-cream-and-tin-can-covered car. I pull up in front of the Dew Drop Inn, a tiny, tacky
motel on Silver Lake. Henry is asleep. I get out, check in, get the desk guy to help me walk
Henry into our room and dump him on the bed. The guy brings in the luggage, eyeballs my
wedding dress and Henrys inert state, and smirks at me. I tip him. He leaves. I remove
Henrys shoes, loosen his tie. I take off my dress and lay it over the armchair.
Im standing in the bathroom, shivering in my slip and brushing my teeth. In the mirror I
can see Henry lying on the bed. Hes snoring. I spit out the toothpaste and rinse my mouth.
Suddenly it comes over me: happiness. And the realization: were married. Well, Im
married, anyway.
When I turn out the light I kiss Henry goodnight. He smells of alcohol sweat and Helens
perfume. Goodnight, goodnight, dont let the bedbugs bite. And I fall asleep, dreamless and
happy.
Monday, October 25, 1993 (Henry is 30, Clare is 22)
HENRY: The Monday after the wedding Clare and I are at Chicago City Hall, being married
by a judge. Gomez and Charisse are the witnesses. Afterward we all go out for dinner at
Charlie Trotters, a restaurant so expensive that the decor resembles the first-class section of
an airplane or a minimalist sculpture. Fortunately, although the food looks like art, it tastes
great. Charisse takes photographs of each course as it appears in front of us.
Hows it feel, being married? asks Charisse.
I feel very married, Clare says.
You could keep going, says Gomez. Try out all the different ceremonies, Buddhist,
nudist...
I wonder if Im a bigamist? Clare is eating something pistachio-colored that has several
large shrimp poised over it as though they are nearsighted old men reading a newspaper.
I think youre allowed to marry the same person as many times as you want, Charisse
says.
Are you the same person? Gomez asks me. The thing Im eating is covered with thin
slices of raw tuna that melt on my tongue. I take a moment to appreciate them before I
answer:
Yes, but more so.
Gomez is disgruntled and mutters something about Zen koans, but Clare smiles at me and
raises her glass. I tap hers with mine: a delicate crystal note rings out and falls away in the
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
199
hum of the restaurant.
And so, we are married.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
200
II
A DROP OF BLOOD
IN A BOWL OF MILK
What is it? My dear?
Ah, how can we bear it?
Bear what?
This. For so short a time. How can we sleep this time away?
We can be quiet together, and pretendsince it is only the beginningthat we have all
the time in the world.
And every day we shall have less. And then none.
Would you rather, therefore, have had nothing at all?
No. This is where I have always been coming to. Since my time began. And when I go
away from here, this will be the mid-point, to which everything ran, before, and from which
everything will run. But now, my love, we are here, we are now, and those other times are
running elsewhere.
A. S. Byatt, Possession
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
201
MARRIED LIFE
March, 1994 (Clare is 22, Henry is 30)
CLARE: And so we are married. At first we live in a two-bedroom apartment in a two-flat in
Ravenswood. Its sunny, with butter-colored hardwood floors and a kitchen full of antique
cabinets and antiquated appliances. We buy things, spend Sunday afternoons in Crate &
Barrel exchanging wedding presents, order a sofa that cant fit through the doors of the
apartment and has to be sent back. The apartment is a laboratory in which we conduct
experiments, perform research on each other. We discover that Henry hates it when I
absentmindedly click my spoon against my teeth while reading the paper at breakfast. We
agree that it is okay for me to listen to Joni Mitchell and it is okay for Henry to listen to The
Shags as long as the other person isnt around. We figure out that Henry should do all the
cooking and I should be in charge of laundry and neither of us is willing to vacuum so We
hire a cleaning service.
We fall into a routine. Henry works Tuesdays through Saturdays at the Newberry. He gets
up at 7:30 and starts the coffee, then throws on his running clothes and goes for a run. When
he gets back he showers and dresses, and I stagger out of bed and chat with him while he
fixes breakfast. After we eat, he brushes his teeth and speeds out the door to catch the El, and
I go back to bed and doze for an hour or so.
When I get up again the apartment is quiet. I take a bath and comb my hair and put on my
work clothes. I pour myself another cup of coffee, and I walk into the back bedroom which is
my studio, and I close the door.
I am having a hard time, in my tiny back bedroom studio, in the beginning of my married
life. The space that I can call mine, that isnt full of Henry, is so small that my ideas have
become small. I am like a caterpillar in a cocoon of paper; all around me are sketches for
sculptures, small drawings that seem like moths fluttering against the windows, beating their
wings to escape from this tiny space. I make maquettes, tiny sculptures that are rehearsals for
huge sculptures. Every day the ideas come more reluctantly, as though they know I will
starve them and stunt their growth. At night I dream about color, about submerging my arms
into vats of paper fiber. I dream about miniature gardens I cant set foot in because I am a
giantess.
The compelling thing about making artor making anything, I supposeis the moment
when the vaporous, insubstantial idea becomes a solid there, a thing, a substance in a world
of substances. Circe, Nimbue, Artemis, Athena, all the old sorceresses: they must have
known the feeling as they transformed mere men into fabulous creatures, stole the secrets of
the magicians, disposed armies: ah, look, there it is, the new thing. Call it a swine, a war, a
laurel tree. Call it art. The magic I can make is small magic now, deferred magic. Every day I
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
202
work, but nothing ever materializes. I feel like Penelope, weaving and unweaving.
And what of Henry, my Odysseus? Henry is an artist of another sort, a disappearing artist.
Our life together in this too-small apartment is punctuated by Henrys small absences.
Sometimes he disappears unobtrusively;
I might be walking from the kitchen into the hall and find a pile of clothing on the floor. I
might get out of bed in the morning and find the shower running and no one in it. Sometimes
its frightening. I am working in my studio one afternoon when I hear someone moaning
outside my door; when I open it I find Henry on his hands and knees, naked, in the hall,
bleeding heavily from his head. He opens his eyes, sees me, and vanishes. Sometimes I wake
up in the night and Henry is gone. In the morning he will tell me where hes been, the way
other husbands might tell their wives a dream they had: I was in the Selzer Library in the
dark, in 1989. Or: I was chased by a German sheperd across somebodys backyard and had
to climb a tree. Or: I was standing in the rain near my parents apartment, listening to my
mother sing. I am waiting for Henry to tell me that he has seen me as a child, but so far this
hasnt happened. When I was a child I looked forward to seeing Henry. Every visit was an
event. Now every absence is a nonevent, a subtraction, an adventure I will hear about when
my adventurer materializes at my feet, bleeding or whistling, smiling or shaking. Now I am
afraid when he is gone.
HENRY: When you live with a woman you learn something every day. So far I have learned
that long hair will clog up the shower drain before you can say Liquid-Plumr; that it is not
advisable to clip something out of the newspaper before your wife has read it, even if the
newspaper in question is a week old; that I am the only person in our two-person household
who can eat the same thing for dinner three nights in a row without pouting; and that
headphones were invented to preserve spouses from each others musical excesses. (How can
Clare listen to Cheap Trick? Why does she like The Eagles? Ill never know, because she
gets all defensive when I ask her. How can it be that the woman I love doesnt want to listen
to Musique du Garrot et de la Farraille?) The hardest lesson is Clares solitude. Sometimes I
come home and Clare seems kind of irritated; Ive interrupted some train of thought, broken
into the dreamy silence of her day. Sometimes I see an expression on Clares face that is like
a closed door. She has gone inside the room of her mind and is sitting there knitting or
something. Ive discovered that Clare likes to be alone. But when I return from time traveling
she is always relieved to see me.
When the woman you live with is an artist, every day is a surprise. Clare has turned the
second bedroom into a wonder cabinet, full of small sculptures and drawings pinned up on
every inch of wall space. There are coils of wire and rolls of paper tucked into shelves and
drawers. The sculptures remind me of kites, or model airplanes. I say this to Clare one
evening, standing in the doorway of her studio in my suit and tie, home from work, about to
begin making dinner, and she throws one at me; it flies surprisingly well, and soon we are
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
203
standing at opposite ends of the hall, tossing tiny sculptures at each other, testing their
aerodynamics. The next day I come home to find that Clare has created a flock of paper and
wire birds, which are hanging from the ceiling in the living room. A week later our bedroom
windows are full of abstract blue translucent shapes that the sun throws across the room onto
the walls, making a sky for the bird shapes Clare has painted there. Its beautiful.
The next evening Im standing in the doorway of Clares studio, watching her finish
drawing a thicket of black lines around a little red bird. Suddenly I see Clare, in her small
room, closed in by all her stuff, and I realize that shes trying to say something, and I know
what I have to do.
Wednesday, April 13, 1994 (Clare is 22, Henry is 30)
CLARE: I hear Henrys key in the front door and I come out of the studio as he walks in. To
my surprise hes carrying a television set. We dont own a TV because Henry cant watch it
and I cant be bothered to watch by myself. The TV is an old, small, dusty black and white
set with a broken antennae.
Hi, honey, Im home, says Henry, setting the TV on the dining room table.
Ugh, its filthy I say. Did you find it in the alley?
Henry looks offended. I bought it at the Unique. Ten bucks.
Why?
Theres a program on tonight that I thought we should watch.
But I cant imagine what show would make Henry risk time traveling.
Its okay, I wont sit and stare at it. I want you to see this.
Oh. What? Im so out of touch with whats on television.
Its a surprise. Its on at eight.
The TV sits on the floor of the dining room while we eat dinner. Henry refuses to answer
any questions about it, and makes a point of teasing me by asking what I would do if I had a
huge studio.
What does it matter? I have a closet. Maybe Ill take up origami.
Come on, seriously
I dont know. I twirl linguine onto my fork. I would make every maquette one hundred
times bigger. Id draw on ten-foot-by-ten-foot pieces of cotton rag paper. I would wear roller
skates to get from one end of the studio to the other. Id set up huge vats, and a Japanese
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
204
drying system, and a ten-pound Reina beater.... Im captivated by my mental image of this
imaginary studio, but then I remember my real studio, and I shrug. Oh well. Maybe
someday. We get by okay on Henrys salary and the interest on my trust fund, but to afford
a real studio I would have to get a job, and then I wouldnt have any time to spend in the
studio. Its a Catch-22. All my artist friends are starving for money or time or both. Charisse
is designing computer software by day and making art at night. She and Gomez are getting
married next month. What should we get the Gomezes for a wedding present?
Huh? Oh, I dunno. Cant we just give them all those espresso machines we got?
We traded those in for the microwave and the bread-making machine.
Oh, yeah. Hey, its almost eight. Grab your coffee, lets go sit in the living room. Henry
pushes back his chair and hoists the television, and I carry both our cups of coffee into the
living room. He sets the set on the coffee table and after messing around with an extension
cord and fussing with the knobs we sit on the couch watching a waterbed commercial on
Channel 9. It looks like its snowing in the waterbed showroom. Damn, says Henry,
peeking at the screen. It worked better in the Unique. The logo for the Illinois Lottery
flashes on the screen. Henry digs in his pants pocket and hands me a small white piece of
paper. Hold this. Its a lottery ticket.
My god. You didnt
Shh. Watch. With great fanfare, the Lottery officials, serious men in suits, announce the
numbers on the randomly chosen ping pong balls that pop one by one into position on the
screen. 43,2, 26,51,10,11. Of course they match the numbers on the ticket in my hand. The
Lottery men congratulate us. We have just won eight million dollars.
Henry clicks off the TV. He smiles. Neat trick, huh?
I dont know what to say. Henry realizes that I am not jumping for joy.
Say, Thank you, darling, for providing the bucks we need to buy a house. That would
work for me.
ButHenryits not real.
Sure it is. Thats a real lottery ticket. If you take it to Katzs Deli, Minnie will give you a
big hug and the State of Illinois will write you a real check.
But you knew.
Sure. Of course. It was just a matter of looking it up in tomorrows Tribune.
We cant...its cheating.
Henry smacks himself dramatically on the forehead. How silly of me. I completely
forgot that youre supposed to buy tickets without having the slightest idea what the numbers
will be. Well, we can fix it. He disappears down the hall into the kitchen and returns with a
box of matches. He lights a match and holds the ticket up to it.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
205
No!
Henry blows out the match. It doesnt matter, Clare. We could win the lottery every
week for the next year if we felt like it. So if you have a problem with it, its no big deal.
The ticket is a little singed on one corner. Henry sits next to me on the couch. Tell you
what. Why dont you just hang on to this, and if you feel like cashing it we will, and if you
decide to give it to the first homeless person you meet you could do that
No fair.
Whats no fair?
You cant just leave me with this huge responsibility.
Well, Im perfectly happy either way. So if you think were cheating the State of Illinois
out of the money theyve scammed from hard-working suckers, then lets just forget about it.
Im sure we can think of some other way to get you a bigger studio.
Oh. A bigger studio. It dawns on me, stupid me, that Henry could win the lottery anytime
at all; that he has never bothered to do so because its not normal; that he has decided to set
aside his fanatical dedication to living like a normal person so I can have a studio big enough
to roller-skate across; that I am being an ingrate.
Clare? Earth to Clare....
Thank you, I say, too abruptly.
Henry raises his eyebrows. Does that mean were going to cash in that ticket?
I dont know. It means Thank you.
Youre welcome. There is an uncomfortable silence. Hey, I wonder whats on TV?
Snow.
Henry laughs, stands up, and pulls me off the couch. Come on, lets go spend our illgotten
gains.
Where are we going?
I dunno. Henry opens the hall closet, hands me my jacket. Hey, lets buy Gomez and
Charisse a car for their wedding.
I think they gave us wine glasses. We are galumphing down the stairs. Outside its a
perfect spring night. We stand on the sidewalk in front of our apartment building, and Henry
takes my hand, and I look at him, and I raise our joined hands and Henry twirls me around
and soon were dancing down Belle Plaine Avenue, no music but the sound of cars
whooshing by and our own laughter, and the smell of cherry blossoms that fall like snow on
the sidewalk as we dance underneath the trees.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
206
Wednesday, May 18, 1994 (Clare is 22, Henry is 30)
CLARE: We are attempting to buy a house. Shopping for houses is amazing. People who
would never invite you into their homes under any other circumstances open their doors
wide, allow you to peer into their closets, pass judgment on their wallpaper, ask pointed
questions about their gutters.
Henry and I have very different ways of looking at houses. I walk through slowly,
consider the woodwork, the appliances, ask questions about the furnace, check for water
damage in the basement. Henry just walks directly to the back of the house, peers out the
back window, and shakes his head at me. Our realtor, Carol, thinks he is a lunatic. I tell her
he is a gardening fanatic. After a whole day of this, we are driving home from Carols office
and I decide to inquire about the method in Henrys madness.
What the hell, I ask, politely, are you doing?
Henry looks sheepish. Well, I wasnt sure if you wanted to know this, but Ive been in
our home-to-be. I dont know when, but I waswill be there on a beautiful autumn day,
late afternoon. I stood at a window at the back of the house, next to that little marble topped
table you got from your grandmother, and looked out over the backyard into the window of a
brick building which seemed to be your studio. You were pulling sheets of paper back there.
They were blue. You wore a yellow bandanna to keep your hair back, and a green sweater
and your usual rubber apron and all that. Theres a grape arbor in the yard. I was there for
about two minutes. So Im just trying to duplicate that view, and when I do I figure thats our
house.
Jeez. Why didnt you mention it? Now I feel silly.
Oh, no. Dont. I just thought you would enjoy doing it the regular way. I mean, you
seemed so thorough, and you read all those books about how to do it, and I thought you
wanted to, you know, shop, and not have it be inevitable.
 Somebody has to ask about termites, and asbestos, and dry rot, and sump pumps...
Exactly. So let us continue as we are, and surely we will arrive separately at our mutual
conclusion.
This does eventually happen, although there are a couple tense moments before then. I
find myself entranced with a white elephant in East Rogers Park, a dreadful neighborhood at
the northern perimeter of the city. Its a mansion, a Victorian monster big enough for a
family of twelve and their servants. I know even before I ask that its not our house; Henry is
appalled by it even before we get in the front door. The backyard is a parking lot for a huge
drug store. The inside has the bones of a truly beautiful house; high ceilings, fireplaces with
marble mantels, ornate woodwork Please, I wheedle. Its so incredible.
Yeah, incredible is the word. Wed be raped and pillaged once a week m this thing. Plus
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
207
it needs total rehab, wiring, plumbing, new furnace, probably a new roof.... Its just not it.
His voice is final, the voice of one who has seen the future, and has no plans to mess with it.
I sulk for a couple days after that. Henry takes me out for sushi.
Tchotchka. Amorta. Heart of my heart. Speak to me.
Im not not speaking to you.
I know. But youre sulking. And I would rather not be sulked at, especially for speaking
common sense.
The waitress arrives, and we hurriedly consult our menus. I dont want to bicker in Katsu,
my favorite sushi restaurant, a place we eat at a lot. I reflect that Henry is counting on this, in
addition to the intrinsic happiness of sushi, to placate me. We order goma-ae, hijiki,
futomaki, kappamaki, and an impressive array of raw things on rice rectangles. Kiko, the
waitress, disappears with our order.
Im not mad at you. This is only sort of true.
Henry raises one eyebrow. Okay. Good. Whats wrong, then?
Are you absolutely sure this place you were in is our house? What if youre wrong and
we turn down something really great just because it doesnt have the right view of the
backyard?
It had an awful lot of our stuff in it to be anything but our house. I grant you that it might
not be our first houseI wasnt close enough to you to see how old you were. I thought you
were pretty young, but maybe you were just well-preserved. But I swear to you that its
really nice, and wont it be great to have a studio in the back like that?
I sigh. Yeah. It will. God. I wish you could videotape some of your excursions. I would
love to see this place. Couldnt you have looked at the address, while you were at it?
Sorry. It was just a quickie.
Sometimes I would give anything to open up Henrys brain and look at his memory like a
movie. I remember when I first learned to use a computer; I was fourteen and Mark was
trying to teach me to draw on his Macintosh. After about ten minutes I wanted to push my
hands through the screen and get at the real thing in there, whatever it was. I like to do things
directly, touch the textures, see the colors. House shopping with Henry is making me crazy.
Its like driving one of those awful toy remote control cars. I always drive them into walls.
On purpose.
Henry. Would you mind if I went house hunting by myself for a while?
No, I guess not. He seems a little hurt. If you really want to.
Well, were going to end up in this place anyway, right? I mean, it wont change
anything.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
208
True. Yeah, dont mind me. But try not to fall for any more hellholes, okay?
I finally find it about a month and twenty or so houses later. Its on Ainslie, in Lincoln
Square, a red brick bungalow built in 1926. Carol pops open the key box and wrestles with
the lock, and as the door opens I have an overwhelming sensation of something fitting... I
walk right through to the back window, peer out at the backyard, and theres my future
studio, and theres the grape arbor and as I turn around Carol looks at me inquisitively and I
say, Well buy it.
She is more than a bit surprised. Dont you want to see the rest of the house? What about
your husband?
Oh, hes already seen it. But yeah, sure, lets see the house.
Saturday, July 9, 1994 (Henry is 31, Clare is 23)
HENRY: Today was Moving Day. All day it was hot; the movers shirts stuck to them as they
walked up the stairs of our apartment this morning, smiling because they figured a twobedroom
apartment would be no big deal and theyd be done before lunch time. Their smiles
fell when they stood in our living room and saw Clares heavy Victorian furniture and my
seventy-eight boxes of books. Now its dark and Clare and I are wandering through the
house, touching the walls, running our hands over the cherry windowsills. Our bare feet slap
the wood floors. We run water into the claw-footed bathtub, turn the burners of the heavy
Universal stove on and off. The windows are naked; we leave the lights off and street light
pours over the empty fireplace through dusty glass. Clare moves from room to room,
caressing her house, our house. I follow her, watching as she opens closets, windows,
cabinets. She stands on tiptoe in the dining room, touches the etched-glass light fixture with a
fingertip. Then she takes off her shirt. I run my tongue over her breasts. The house envelops
us, watches us, contemplates us as we make love in it for the first time, the first of many
times, and afterward, as we lie spent on the bare floor surrounded by boxes, I feel that we
have found our home.
Sunday, August 28, 1994 (Clare is 23, Henry is 31)
CLARE: Its a humid sticky hot Sunday afternoon, and Henry, Gomez, and I are at large in
Evanston. We spent the morning at Lighthouse Beach, playing in Lake Michigan and
roasting ourselves. Gomez wanted to be buried in the sand, so Henry and I obliged. We ate
our picnic, and napped. Now we are walking down the shady side of Church Street, licking
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
209
Orangsicles, groggy with sun.
Clare, your hair is full of sand, says Henry. I stop and lean over and beat my hair like a
carpet with my hand. A whole beach falls out of it.
My ears are full of sand. And my unmentionables  Gomez says.
Ill be glad to whack you in the head, but you will have to do the rest yourself, I say. A
small breeze blows up and we hold our bodies out to it. I coil my hair onto the top of my
head and immediately feel better.
What shall we do next? Gomez inquires. Henry and I exchange glances.
Bookmans Alley we chant in unison.
Gomez groans. Oh, God. Not a bookstore. Lord, Lady, have mercy on your humble
servant
Bookmans Alley it is, then  Henry says blithely.
Just promise me we wont spend more than, oh, say, three hours...
I think they close at five I tell him, and its already 2:30.
You could go have a beer, says Henry.
I thought Evanston was dry.
No, I think they changed it. If you can prove youre not a member of the YMCA you can
have a beer.
Ill come with you. All for one and one for all. We turn onto Sherman, walk past what
used to be Marshall Fields and is now a sneaker outlet store, past what used to be the
Varsity Theater and is now a Gap. We turn into the alley that runs between the florists and
the shoe repair shop and lo and behold, its Bookmans Alley. I push the door open and we
troop into the dim cool shop as though we are tumbling into the past.
Roger is sitting behind his little untidy desk chatting with a ruddy white-haired gentleman
about something to do with chamber music. He smiles when he sees us. Clare, Ive got
something you will like, he says. Henry makes a beeline for the back of the store where all
the printing and bibliophilic stuff is. Gomez meanders around looking at the weird little
objects that are tucked into the various sections: a saddle in Westerns, a deerstalkers cap in
Mysteries. He takes a gumdrop from the immense bowl in the Childrens section, not
realizing that those gumdrops have been there for years and you can hurt yourself on them.
The book Roger has for me is a Dutch catalog of decorative papers with real sample papers
tipped in. I can see immediately that its a find, so I lay it on the table by the desk, to start the
pile of things I want. Then I begin to peruse the shelves dreamily, inhaling the deep dusty
smell of paper, glue, old carpets and wood. I see Henry sitting on the floor in the Art section
with something open on his lap. Hes sunburned, and his hair stands up every which way.
Im glad he cut it. He looks more like himself to me now, with the short hair. As I watch him
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
210
he puts his hand up to twirl a piece of it around his finger, realizes its too short to do that,
and scratches his ear. I want to touch him, run my hands through his funny sticking-up hair,
but I turn and burrow into the Travel section instead.
HENRY: Clare is standing in the main room by a huge stack of new arrivals. Roger doesnt
really like people fiddling with unpriced stuff, but Ive noticed that hell let Clare do pretty
much whatever she wants in his store. She has her head bent over a small red book. Her hair
is trying to escape from the coil on her head, and one strap of her sundress is hanging off her
shoulder, exposing a bit of her bathing suit. This is so poignant, so powerful, that I urgently
need to walk over to her, touch her, possibly, if no one is looking, bite her, but at the same
time I dont want this moment to end, and suddenly I notice Gomez, who is standing in the
Mystery section looking at Clare with an expression that so exactly mirrors my own feelings
that I am forced to see.
At this moment, Clare looks up at me and says, Henry, look, its Pompeii. She holds out
the tiny book of picture postcards, and something in her voice says, See, I have chosen you. I
walk to her, put my arm around her shoulders, straighten the fallen strap. When I look up a
second later, Gomez has turned his back on us and is intently surveying the Agatha Christies.
Sunday, January 15, 1995 (Clare is 23, Henry is 31)
CLARE: I am washing dishes and Henry is dicing green peppers. The sun is setting very
pinkly over the January snow in our backyard on this early Sunday evening, and we are
making chili and singing Yellow Submarine: In the town where I was born Lived a man who
sailed to sea...
Onions hiss in the pan on the stove. As we sing And our friends are all on board I
suddenly hear my voice floating alone and I turn and Henrys clothes lie in a heap, the knife
is on the kitchen floor. Half of a pepper sways slightly on the cutting board.
I turn off the heat and cover the onions. I sit down next to the pile of clothes and scoop
them up, still warm from Henrys body, and sit until all their warmth is from my body,
holding them. Then I get up and go into our bedroom, fold the clothes neatly and place them
on our bed. Then I continue making dinner as best I can, and eat by myself, waiting and
wondering.
Friday, February 3, 1995 (Clare is 23, Henry is 31, and 39)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
211
CLARE: Gomez and Charisse and Henry and I are sitting around our dining room table
playing Modern Capitalist Mind-Fuck. Its a game Gomez and Charisse have invented. We
play it with a Monopoly set. It involves answering questions, getting points, accumulating
money, and exploiting your fellow players. Its Gomezs turn. He shakes the dice, gets a six,
and lands on Community Chest. He draws a card.
Okay, everybody. What modern technological invention would you deep-six for the
good of society?
Television, I say.
Fabric softener, says Charisse.
Motion detectors, says Henry vehemently.
And I say gunpowder.
Thats hardly modern  I object.
Okay. The assembly line.
You dont get two answers, says Henry.
Sure I do. What kind of a lame-ass answer is motion detectors, anyway?
I keep getting ratted on by the motion detectors in the stacks at the Newberry. Twice this
week Ive ended up in the stacks after hours, and as soon as I show up the guard is upstairs
checking it out. Its driving me nuts.
I dont think the proletariat would be affected much by the de-invention of motion
sensors. Clare and I each get ten points for correct answers, Charisse gets five points for
creativity, and Henry gets to go backward three spaces for valuing the needs of the individual
over the collective good.
That puts me back on Go. Give me $200.00, Banker. Charisse gives Henry his money.
Oops, says Gomez. I smile at him. Its my turn. I roll a four.
Park Place. Ill buy it. In order to buy anything I must correctly answer a question.
Henry draws from the Chance pile.
Whom would you prefer to have dinner with and why: Adam Smith, Karl Marx, Rosa
Luxembourg, Alan Greenspan?
Rosa.
Why?
Most interesting death. Henry, Charisse, and Gomez confer and agree that I can buy
Park Place. I give Charisse my money and she hands me the deed. Henry shakes and lands on
Income Tax. Income Tax has its own special cards. We all tense, in apprehension. He reads
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
212
the card.
Great Leap Forward.
Damn  We all hand Charisse all our real estate, and she puts it back in the Banks
holdings, along with her own.
Well, so much for Park Place.
Sorry. Henry moves halfway across the board, which puts him on St. James. Ill buy
it.
My poor little St. James, laments Charisse. I draw a card from the Free Parking pile.
What is the exchange rate of the Japanese yen against the dollar today?
I have no idea. Where did that question come from?
Me. Charisse smiles.
Whats the answer?
99.8 yen to the dollar.
Okay. No St. James. Your turn. Henry hands Charisse the dice. She rolls a four and
ends up going to Jail. She picks a card that tells her what her crime is: Insider Trading. We
laugh.
That sounds more like you guys, says Gomez. Henry and I smile modestly. We are
making a killing in the stock market these days. To get out of Jail Charisse has to answer
three questions.
Gomez picks from the Chance pile. Question the First: name two famous artists Trotsky
knew in Mexico.
Diego Rivera and Frieda Kahlo.
Good. Question the Second: How much does Nike pay its Vietnamese workers per diem
to make those ridiculously expensive sneakers?
Oh, God. I dont know...$3.00? Ten cents?
Whats your answer? There is an immense crash in the kitchen. We all jump up, and
Henry says, Sit down! so emphatically that we do. He runs into the kitchen. Charisse and
Gomez look at me, startled. I shake my head. I dont know. But I do. There is a low
murmur of voices and a moan. Charisse and Gomez are frozen, listening. I stand up and
softly follow Henry.
He is kneeling on the floor, holding a dish cloth against the head of the naked man lying
on the linoleum, who is of course Henry. The wooden cabinet that holds our dishes is on its
side; the glass is broken and all the dishes have spilled out and shattered. Henry is lying in
the midst of the mess, bleeding and covered with glass. Both Henrys look at me, one
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
213
piteously, the other urgently. I kneel opposite Henry, over Henry. Wheres all this blood
coming from? I whisper. I think its all from the scalp, Henry whispers back. Lets call
an ambulance, I say. I start to pick the glass out of Henrys chest. He closes his eyes and
says, Dont. I stop.
Holy cats. Gomez stands in the doorway. I see Charisse standing behind him on tiptoe,
trying to see over his shoulder. Wow, she says, pushing past Gomez. Henry throws a dish
cloth over his prone duplicates genitalia.
Oh, Henry, dont worry about it, Ive drawn a gazillion models
I try to retain a modicum of privacy, Henry snaps. Charisse recoils as though hes
slapped her.
Listen, Henry- Gomez rumbles.
I cant think with all this going on. Everyone please shut up, I demand, exasperated. To
my surprise they do. What happens? I ask Henry, who has been lying on the floor
grimacing and trying not to move. He opens his eyes and stares up at me for a moment
before answering.
Ill be gone in a few minutes, he finally says, softly. He looks at Henry. I want a
drink. Henry bounds up and comes back with a juice glass full of lack Daniels. I support
Henrys head and he manages to down about a third of it.
Is that wise? Gomez asks.
Dont know. Dont care, Henry assures him from the floor. This hurts like hell. He
gasps. Stand back! Close your eyes
Why? Gomez begins.
Henry is convulsing on the floor as though he is being electrified. His head is nodding
violently and he yells Clare! and I close my eyes. There is a noise like a bed sheet being
snapped but much louder and then there is a cascade of glass and china everywhere and
Henry has vanished.
Oh my God, says Charisse. Henry and I stare at each other. That was different, Henry.
That was violent and ugly. What is happening to you? His white face tells me that he doesnt
know either. He inspects the whiskey for glass fragments and then drinks it down.
Whats with all the glass? Gomez demands, gingerly brushing himself off.
Henry stands up, offers me his hand. Hes covered with a fine mist of blood and bits of
crockery and crystal. I stand up and look at Charisse. She has a big cut on her face; blood is
running down her cheek like a tear.
Anything thats not part of my body gets left behind, Henry explains. He shows them
the gap where he had a tooth pulled because he kept losing the filling. So whenever I went
back to, at least all the glass is gone, they wont have to sit there and pick it out with
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
214
tweezers,
No, but we will, Gomez says, gently removing glass from Charisses hair. He has a
point.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
215
LIBRARY SCIENCE FICTION
Wednesday, March 8, 1995 (Henry is 31)
HENRY: Matt and I are playing Hide and Seek in the stacks in Special Collections. Hes
looking for me because we are supposed to be giving a calligraphy Show and Tell to a
Newberry Trustee and her Ladies Lettering Club. Im hiding from him because Im trying to
get all of my clothes on my body before he finds me.
Come on, Henry, theyre waiting, Matt calls from somewhere in Early American
Broadsides. Im pulling on my pants in Twentieth-Century French livres dartistes. lust a
second, I just want to find this one thing, I call. I make a mental note to learn ventriloquism
for moments like this. Matts voice is coming closer as he says, You know Mrs. Connelly is
going to have kittens, just forget it, lets get out there He sticks his head into my row as
Im buttoning my shirt. What are you doing?
Sorry?
Youve been running around naked in the stacks again, havent you?
Um, maybe. I try to sound nonchalant.
Jesus, Henry. Give me the cart. Matt grabs the book-laden cart and starts to wheel it off
toward the Reading Room. The heavy metal door opens and closes. I put on my socks and
shoes, knot my tie, dust off my jacket and put it on. Then I walk out into the Reading Room,
face Matt over the long classroom table surrounded by middle-aged rich ladies, and begin to
discourse on the various book hands of lettering genius Rudolf Koch. Matt lays out felts and
opens portfolios and interjects intelligent things about Koch and by the end of the hour he
seems like maybe hes not going to kill me this time. The happy ladies toddle off to lunch.
Matt and I move around the table, putting books back into their boxes and onto the cart.
Im sorry about being late, I say.
If you werent brilliant, Matt replies, we would have tanned you and used you to
rebind Das Manifest der Nacktkultur by now.
Theres no such book.
Wanna bet?
No. We wheel the cart back to the stacks and begin reshelving the portfolios and books.
I buy Matt lunch at the Beau Thai, and all is forgiven, if not forgotten.
Tuesday, April 11, 1995 (Henry is 31)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
216
HENRY: There is a stairwell in the Newberry Library that I am afraid of. It is located toward
the east end of the long hallway that runs through each of the four floors, bisecting the
Reading Rooms from the stacks. It is not grand, like the main staircase with its marble treads
and carved balustrades. It has no windows. It has fluorescent lights, cinderblock walls,
concrete stairs with yellow safety strips. There are metal doors with no windows on each
floor. But these are not the things that frighten me. The thing about this stairwell that I dont
like one bit is the Cage.
The Cage is four stories tall and runs up the center of the stairwell.
At first glance it looks like an elevator cage, but there is no elevator and never was. No
one at the Newberry seems to know what the Cage is for, or why it was installed. I assume
its there to stop people from throwing themselves from the stairs and landing in a broken
heap. The Cage is painted beige. It is made of steel.
When I first came to work at the Newberry, Catherine gave me a tour of all the nooks and
crannies. She proudly showed me the stacks, the artifact room, the unused room in the east
link where Matt practices his singing, McAllisters amazingly untidy cubicle, the Fellows
carrels, the staff lunch room. As Catherine opened the door to the stairwell, on our way up to
Conservation, I had a moment of panic. I glimpsed the crisscrossed wire of the Cage and
balked, like a skittish horse.
Whats that? I asked Catherine.
Oh, thats the Cage, she replied, casually.
Is it an elevator?
No, its just a cage. I dont think it does anything.
Oh. I walked up to it, looked in. Is there a door down there?
No. You cant get into it.
Oh. We walked up the stairs and continued on with our tour.
Since then, I have avoided using that stairway. I try not to think about the Cage; I dont
want to make a big deal out of it. But if I ever end up inside it, I wont be able to get out.
Friday, June 9, 1995 (Henry is 31)
HENRY: I materialize on the floor of the Staff Mens Room on the fourth floor of the
Newberry. Ive been gone for days, lost in 1973, rural Indiana, and Im tired, hungry, and
unshaven; worst of all, Ive got a black eye and I cant find my clothes. I get up and lock
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
217
myself in a stall, sit down and think. While Im thinking someone comes in, unzips, and
stands in front of the urinal pissing. When hes done he zips and then stands for a moment
and right then I happen to sneeze.
Whos there? says Roberto. I sit silently. Through the space between the door and the
stall I see Roberto slowly bend down and look under the door at my feet.
Henry? he says. I will have Matt bring your clothes. Please get dressed and come to
my office.
I slink into Robertos office and sit down across from him. Hes on the phone, so I sneak
a look at his calendar. Its Friday. The clock above the desk says 2:17. Ive been gone for a
little more than twenty-two hours. Roberto places the phone gently in its cradle and turns to
look at me. Shut the door, he says. This is a mere formality because the walls of our offices
dont actually go all the way up to the ceiling, but I do as he says.
Roberto Calle is an eminent scholar of the Italian Renaissance and the Head of Special
Collections. He is ordinarily the most sanguine of men, golden, bearded, and encouraging;
now he gazes at me sadly over his bifocals and says, We really cant have this, you know.
Yes, I say. I know.
May I ask how you acquired that rather impressive black eye? Robertos voice is grim.
I think I walked into a tree.
Of course. How silly of me not to think of that. We sit and look at each other. Roberto
says, Yesterday I happened to notice Matt walking into your office carrying a pile of
clothing. Since it was not the first time I had seen Matt walking around with clothing I asked
him where he had gotten this particular pile, and he said that he had found it in the Mens
Room. And so I asked him why he felt compelled to transport this pile of clothing to your
office and he said that it looked like what you were wearing, which it did. And since no one
could find you, we simply left the clothing on your desk.
He pauses as though Im supposed to say something, but I cant think of anything
appropriate. He goes on, This morning Clare called and told Isabelle you had the flu and
wouldnt be in. I lean my head against my hand. My eye is throbbing. Explain yourself,
Roberto demands.
Its tempting to say, Roberto, I got stuck in 1973 and I couldnt get out and I was in
Muncie, Indiana, for days living in a barn and I got decked by the guy who owned the barn
because he thought I was trying to mess with his sheep. But of course I cant say that. I say,
I dont really remember, Roberto. Im sorry.
Ah. Well, I guess Matt wins the pool.
What pool?
Roberto smiles, and I think that maybe hes not going to fire me. Matt bet that you
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
218
wouldnt even attempt to explain. Amelia put her money on abduction by aliens. Isabelle bet
that you were involved in an international drug-running cartel and had been kidnapped and
killed by the Mafia.
What about Catherine?
Oh, Catherine and I are convinced that this is all due to an unspeakably bizarre sexual
kink involving nudity and books.
I take a deep breath. Its more like epilepsy, I say.
Roberto looks skeptical. Epilepsy? You disappeared yesterday afternoon. You have a
black eye and scratches all over your face and hands. I had Security searching the building
top to bottom for you yesterday; they tell me you are in the habit of taking off your clothing
in the stacks.
I stare at my fingernails. When I look up, Roberto is staring out the window. I dont
know what to do with you, Henry. I would hate to lose you; when you are here and fully
clothed you can be quite...competent. But this just will not do!
We sit and look at each other for minutes. Finally Roberto says, Tell me it wont happen
again 
I cant. I wish I could.
Roberto sighs, and waves his hand at the door. Go. Go catalogue the Quigley Collection,
thatll keep you out of trouble for a while. (The Quigley Collection, recently donated, is
over two thousand pieces of Victorian ephemera, mostly having to do with soap.) I nod my
obedience and stand up.
As I open the door Roberto says, Henry. Is it so bad that you cant tell me?
I hesitate. Yes  I say. Roberto is silent. I close the door behind me and walk to my
office. Matt is sitting behind my desk, transferring stuff from his calendar into mine. He
looks up as I come in. Did he fire you? Matt asks.
No, I reply.
Why not?
Dunno.
Odd. By the way, I did your lecture for the Chicago Hand Bookbinders.
Thanks. Buy you lunch tomorrow?
Sure. Matt checks the calendar in front of him. Weve got a Show and Tell for a
History of Typography class from Columbia in forty-five minutes. I nod and start
rummaging in my desk for the list of items were about to show. Henry?
Yeah?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
219
Where were you?
Muncie, Indiana. 1973.
Yeah, right. Matt rolls his eyes and grins sarcastically. Never mind.
Sunday, December 17, 1995 (Clare is 24, Henry is 8)
CLARE: Im visiting Kimy. Its a snowy Sunday afternoon in December. Ive been Christmas
shopping, and Im sitting in Kimys kitchen drinking hot chocolate, warming my feet by the
baseboard radiator, regaling her with stories of bargains and decorations. Kimy plays
solitaire while we talk; I admire her practiced shuffle, her efficient slap of red card on black
card. A pot of stew simmers on the stove. Theres a noise in the dining room; a chair falls
over. Kimy looks up, turns.
Kimy I whisper. Theres a little boy under the dining room table.
Someone giggles. Henry? Kimy calls. No answer. She gets up and stands in the
doorway. Hey, buddy. Stop that. Put some clothes on, mister. Kimy disappears into the
dining room. Whispering. More giggles. Silence. Suddenly a small naked boy is staring at me
from the doorway, and just as suddenly he vanishes. Kimy comes back in, sits down at the
table, and resumes her game.
Wow, I say.
Kimy smiles. That dont happen so much these days. Now hes a grown-up, when he
comes. But he dont come as much as he used to.
Ive never seen him go forward like that, into the future.
Well, you dont have so much future with him, yet.
It takes me a second to figure out what she means. When I do, I wonder what kind of
future it will be, and then I think about the future expanding, gradually opening enough for
Henry to come to me from the past. I drink my chocolate and stare out into Kimys frozen
yard.
Do you miss him? I ask her.
Yeah, I miss him. But hes grown-up now. When he comes like a little boy, its like a
ghost, you know? I nod. Kimy finishes her game, gathers up the cards. She looks at me,
smiles. When you guys gonna have a baby, huh?
I dont know, Kimy. Im not sure we can.
She stands up, walks over to the stove and stirs the stew. Well, you never know.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
220
True. You never know.
Later, Henry and I are lying in bed. Snow is still falling; the radiators make faint clucking
noises. I turn to him and he looks at me and I say, Lets make a baby.
Monday, March 11, 1996 (Henry is 32)
HENRY: I have tracked down Dr. Kendrick; he is affiliated with the University of Chicago
Hospital. It is a vile wet cold day in March. March in Chicago seems like it ought to be an
improvement over February, but sometimes it isnt. I get on the IC and sit facing backwards.
Chicago streams out behind us and soon enough we are at 59th Street. I disembark and
struggle through the sleety rain. Its 9:00 a.m., its Monday. Everyone is drawn into
themselves, resisting being back in the workweek. I like Hyde Park. It makes me feel as
though Ive fallen out of Chicago and into some other city, Cambridge, perhaps. The gray
stone buildings are dark with rain and the trees drip fat icy drops on passersby. I feel the
blank serenity of the fait accompli; I will be able to convince Kendrick, though I have failed
to convince so many doctors, because I do convince him. He will be my doctor because in
the future he is my doctor.
I enter a small faux Mies building next to the hospital. I take the elevator to Three, open
the glass door that bears the golden legend Drs. C. P. Shane and D. L Kendrick, announce
myself to the receptionist and sit in one of the deep lavender upholstered chairs. The waiting
room is pink and violet, I suppose to soothe the patients. Dr. Kendrick is a geneticist, and not
incidentally, a philosopher; the latter, I think, must be of some use in coping with the harsh
practical realities of the former. Today there is no one here but me. Im ten minutes early.
The wallpaper is broad stripes the exact color of Pepto-Bismol. It clashes with the painting of
a watermill opposite me, mostly browns and greens. The furniture is pseudocolonial, but
theres a pretty nice rug, some kind of soft Persian carpet, and I feel kind of sorry for it, stuck
here in this ghastly waiting room. The receptionist is a kind-looking middle-aged woman
with very deep wrinkles from years of tanning; she is deeply tanned now, in March in
Chicago.
At 9:35 I hear voices in the corridor and a blond woman enters the waiting room with a
little boy in a small wheelchair. The boy appears to have cerebral palsy or something like it.
The woman smiles at me; I smile back. As she turns I see that she is pregnant. The
receptionist says, You may go in, Mr. DeTamble, and I smile at the boy as I pass him. His
enormous eyes take me in, but he doesnt smile back.
As I enter Dr. Kendricks office, he is making notes in a file. I sit down and he continues
to write. He is younger than I thought he would be; late thirties. I always expect doctors to be
old men. I cant help it, its left over from my childhood of endless medical men. Kendrick is
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
221
red-haired, thin-faced, bearded, with thick wire-rimmed glasses. He looks a little bit like D.
H. Lawrence. Hes wearing a nice charcoal-gray suit and a narrow dark green tie with a
rainbow trout tie clip. An ashtray overflows at his elbow; the room is suffused with cigarette
smoke, although he isnt smoking right now. Everything is very modern: tubular steel, beige
twill, blond wood. He looks up at me and smiles.
Good morning, Mr. DeTamble. What can I do for you? He is looking at his calendar. I
dont seem to have any information about you, here? What seems to be the problem?
Dasein.
Kendrick is taken aback.  Dasein? Being? How so?
I have a condition which Im told will become known as Chrono-Impairment. I have
difficulty staying in the present.
Im sorry?
I time travel. Involuntarily.
Kendrick is flustered, but subdues it. I like him. He is attempting to deal with me in a
manner befitting a sane person, although Im sure he is considering which of his psychiatrist
friends to refer me to.
But why do you need a geneticist? Or are you consulting me as a philosopher?
Its a genetic disease. Although it will be pleasant to have someone to chat with about
the larger implications of the problem.
Mr. DeTamble. You are obviously an intelligent man...Ive never heard of this disease. I
cant do anything for you.
You dont believe me.
Right. I dont.
Now I am smiling, ruefully. I feel horrible about this, but it has to be done. Well. Ive
been to quite a few doctors in my life, but this is the first time Ive ever had anything to offer
in the way of proof. Of course no one ever believes me. You and your wife are expecting a
child next month?
He is wary. Yes. How do you know?
In a few years I look up your childs birth certificate. I travel to my wifes past, I write
down the information in this envelope. She gives it to me when we meet in the present. I give
it to you, now. Open it after your son is born.
Were having a daughter.
No, youre not, actually, I say gently. But lets not quibble about it. Save that, open it
after the child is born. Dont throw it out. After you read it, call me, if you want to. I get up
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
222
to leave. Good luck, I say, although I do not believe in luck, these days. I am deeply sorry
for him, but theres no other way to do this.
Goodbye, Mr. DeTamble, Dr. Kendrick says coldly. I leave. As I get into the elevator I
think to myself that he must be opening the envelope right now. Inside is a sheet of typing
paper. It says:
Colin Joseph Kendrick
April 6, 1996 1:18 a.m.
6 lbs. 8 oz Caucasian male
Down Syndrome
Saturday, April 6, 1996, 5:32 a.m. (Henry is 32, Clare is 24)
HENRY: We are sleeping all tangled together; all night we have been waking, turning, getting
up, coming back to bed. The Kendricks baby was born in the early hours of today. Soon the
phone will ring. It does ring. The phone is on Clares side of the bed, and she picks it up and
says Hello? very quietly, and hands it to me.
How did you know? How did you know? Kendrick is almost whispering.
Im sorry. Im so sorry. Neither of us says anything for a minute. I think Kendrick is
crying.
Come to my office.
When?
Tomorrow, he says, and hangs up the phone.
Sunday, April 7, 1996 (Henry is 32 and 8, Clare is 24)
HENRY: Clare and I are driving to Hyde Park. Weve been silent for most of the ride. Its
raining, and the wipers provide the rhythm section for the water streaming off the car and the
wind.
As though continuing a conversation we havent exactly been having. Clare says, It
doesnt seem fair.
What? Kendrick?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
223
Yeah.
Nature isnt fair.
Ohno. I mean, yeah, its sad about the baby, but actually I meant us. It seems not fair
that were exploiting this.
Unsporting, you mean?
Uh-huh.
I sigh. The 57th Street exit sign appears and Clare changes lanes and pulls off the drive. I
agree with you, but its too late. And I tried...
Well, its too late, anyway.
Right. We lapse into silence again. I direct Clare through the maze of one-way streets,
and soon we are sitting in front of Kendricks office building.
Good luck.
Thanks. I am nervous.
Be nice. Clare kisses me. We look at each other, all our hopes submerged in feeling
guilty about Kendrick. Clare smiles, and looks away. I get out of the car and watch as Clare
drives off slowly down 59th Street and crosses the Midway. She has an errand to do at the
Smart Gallery.
The main door is unlocked and I take the elevator up to Three. Theres no one in
Kendricks waiting room, and I walk through it and down the hall. Kendricks door is open.
The lights are off. Kendrick stands behind his desk with his back to me, looking out the
window at the rainy street below. I stand silently in the doorway for a long moment. Finally I
walk into the office.
Kendrick turns and I am shocked at the difference in his face. Ravaged is not the word.
He is emptied; something has gone that was there before. Security; trust; confidence. I am so
accustomed to living on a metaphysical trapeze that I forget that other people tend to enjoy
more solid ground.
Henry DeTamble, says Kendrick.
Hello.
Why did you come to me?
Because I had come to you. It wasnt a matter of choice. Fate?
Call it whatever you want. Things get kind of circular, when youre me. Cause and effect
get muddled.
Kendrick sits down at his desk. The chair squeaks. The only other sound is the rain. He
reaches in his pocket for his cigarettes, finds them, looks at me. I shrug. He lights one, and
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
224
smokes for a little while. I regard him.
How did you know? he says.
I told you before. I saw the birth certificate.
When?
1999.
Impossible.
Explain it, then.
Kendrick shakes his head. I cant. Ive been trying to work it out, and I cant.
Everythingwas correct. The hour, the day, the weight, the.. .abnormality. He looks at me
desperately. What if we had decided to name him something elseAlex, or Fred, or
Sam...?
I shake my head, and stop when I realize Im mimicking him. But you didnt. I wont go
so far as to say you couldnt, but you did not. All I was doing was reporting. Im not a
psychic.
Do you have any children?
No. I dont want to discuss it, although eventually I will have to. Im sorry about
Colin. But you know, hes really a wonderful boy.
Kendrick stares at me. I tracked down the mistake. Our test results were accidentally
switched with those of a couple named Kenwick.
What would you have done if you had known?
He looks away. I dont know. My wife and I are Catholic, so I imagine the end result
would be the same. Its ironic..
Yes.
Kendrick stubs out his cigarette and lights another. I resign myself to a smoke-induced
headache.
How does it work?
What?
This supposed time travel thing that you supposedly do. He sounds angry. You say
some magic words? Climb in a machine?
I try to explain plausibly. No. I dont do anything. It just happens. I cant control it, I
justone minute everything is fine, the next Im somewhere else, some other time. Like
changing channels. I just suddenly find myself in another time and place.
Well, what do you want me to do about it?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
225
I lean forward, for emphasis. I want you to find out why, and stop it.
Kendrick smiles. Its not a friendly smile. Why would you want to do that? It seems like
it would be quite handy for you. Knowing all these things that other people dont know.
Its dangerous. Sooner or later its going to kill me.
I cant say that I would mind that.
Theres no point in continuing. I stand up, and walk to the door. Goodbye, Dr.
Kendrick. I walk slowly down the hall, giving him a chance to call me back, but he doesnt.
As I stand in the elevator I reflect miserably that whatever went wrong, it just had to go that
way, and sooner or later it will right itself. As I open the door I see Clare waiting for me
across the street in the car. She turns her head and there is such an expression of hope, such
anticipation in her face that I am overwhelmed by sadness, I am dreading telling her, and as I
walk across the street to her my ears are buzzing and I lose my balance and I am falling but
instead of pavement I hit carpeting and I lie where I fall until I hear a familiar childs voice
saying Henry, are you okay? and I look up to see myself, age eight, sitting up in bed,
looking at me.
Im fine, Henry. He looks dubious. Really, Im okay.
You want some Ovaltine?
Sure. He gets out of bed, toddles across the bedroom and down the hall. Its the middle
of the night. He fusses around in the kitchen for a while, and eventually returns with two
mugs of hot chocolate. We drink them slowly, in silence. When were done Henry takes the
mugs back to the kitchen and washes them. No sense in leaving the evidence around, When
he comes back I ask, Whats up?
Not much. We went to see another doctor today.
Hey, me too. Which one?
I forget the name. An old guy with a lot of hair in his ears.
How was it?
Henry shrugs. He didnt believe me.
Uh-huh. You should just give up. None of them ever will believe you. Well, the one I
saw today believed me, I think, but he didnt want to help.
How come?
He just didnt like me, I guess.
Oh. Hey, do you want some blankets?
Um, maybe just one. I strip the bedspread off Henrys bed and curl up on the floor.
Good night. Sleep tight. I see the flash of my small selfs white teeth in the blueness of the
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
226
bedroom, and then he turns away into a tight ball of sleeping boy and I am left staring at my
old ceiling, willing myself back to Clare.
CLARE: Henry walks out of the building looking unhappy, and suddenly he cries out and hes
gone. I jump out of the car and run over to the spot where Henry was, just an instant ago, but
of course theres just a pile of clothing there, now. I gather everything up and stand for a few
heartbeats in the middle of the street, and as I stand there I see a mans face looking down at
me from a window on the third floor. Then he disappears. I walk back to the car and get in,
and sit staring at Henrys light blue shirt and black pants, wondering if theres any point in
staying here. Ive got Brideshead Revisited in my purse, so I decide to hang around for a
while in case Henry reappears soon. As I turn to find the book I see a red-haired man running
toward the car. He stops at the passenger door and peers in at me. This must be Kendrick. I
flip the lock and he climbs into the car, and then he doesnt know what to say.
Hello, I say. You must be David Kendrick. Im Clare DeTamble.
Yes hes completely flustered, yes, yes. Your husband
Just vanished in broad daylight.
Yes!
You seem surprised.
Well
Didnt he tell you? He does that. So far Im not very impressed with this guy, but I
persevere. Im so sorry about your baby. But Henry says hes a darling kid, and that he
draws really well and has a lot of imagination. And your daughters very gifted, and it will
all be fine. Youll see.
Hes gaping at me. We dont have a daughter. JustColin.
But you will. Her name is Nadia.
Its been a shock. My wife is very upset...
But it will be okay. Really. To my surprise this stranger begins to cry, his shoulders
shaking, his face buried in his hands. After a few minutes he stops, and raises his head. I
hand him a Kleenex, and he blows his nose.
Im so sorry, he begins.
Never mind. What happened in there, with you and Henry? It went badly.
How do you know?
He was all stressed out, so he lost his grip on now.
Where is he? Kendrick looks around as though I might be hiding Henry in the back
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
227
seat.
I dont know. Not here. We were hoping you could help, but I guess not.
Well, I dont see how At this instant Henry appears in exactly the same spot he
disappeared from. Theres a car about twenty feet away, and the driver slams his brakes as
Henry throws himself across the hood of our car. The man rolls down his window and Henry
sits up and makes a little how, and the man yells something and drives off. My blood is
singing in rny ears. I look over at Kendrick, who is speechless. I jump out of the car, and
Henry eases himself off the hood.
Hi, Clare. That was close, huh? I wrap my arms around him; hes shaking. Have you
got my clothes?
Yeah, right hereoh hey, Kendrick is here.
What? Where?
In the car.
Why?
He saw you disappear and it seems to have affected his brain.
Henry sticks his head in the drivers side door. Hello. He grabs his clothing and starts to
get dressed. Kendrick gets out of the car and trots around to us.
Where were you?
1971. I was drinking Ovaltine with myself, as an eight-year-old, in my old bedroom, at
one in the morning. I was there for about an hour. Why do you ask? Henry regards
Kendrick coldly as he knots his tie.
Unbelievable.
You can go on saying that as long as you want, but unfortunately its true.
You mean you became eight years old?
No. I mean I was sitting in my old bedroom in my dads apartment, in 1971, just as I am,
thirty-two years old, in the company of myself, at eight. Drinking Ovaltine. We were chatting
about the incredulity of the medical profession. Henry walks around to the side of the car
and opens the door. Clare, lets vamoose. This is pointless.
I walk to the drivers side. Goodbye, Dr. Kendrick. Good luck with Colin.
Wait Kendrick pauses, collects himself. This is a genetic disease?
Yes, says Henry. Its a genetic disease, and were trying to have a child 
Kendrick smiles, sadly. A chancy thing to do.
I smile back at him. Were used to taking chances. Goodbye. Henry and I get into the
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
228
car, and drive away. As I pull onto Lake Shore Drive I glance at Henry, who to my surprise
is grinning broadly.
What are you so pleased about?
Kendrick. He is totally hooked.
You think?
Oh, yeah.
Well, great. But he seemed kind of dense.
Hes not.
Okay. We drive home in silence, an entirely different quality of silence than we arrived
with. Kendrick calls Henry that evening, and they make an appointment to begin the work of
figuring out how to keep Henry in the here and now.
Friday, April 12, 1996 (Henry is 32)
HENRY: Kendrick sits with his head bowed. His thumbs move around the perimeter of his
palms as though they want to escape from his hands. As the afternoon has passed the office
has been illuminated with golden light; Kendrick has sat immobile except for those twitching
thumbs, listening to me talk. The red Indian carpet, the beige twill armchairs steel legs have
flared bright; Kendricks cigarettes, a pack of Camels, have sat untouched while he listened.
The gold rims of his round glasses have been picked out by the sunlight; the edge of
Kendricks right ear has glowed red, his foxish hair and pink skin have been as burnished by
the light as the yellow chrysanthemums in the brass bowl on the table between us. All
afternoon, Kendrick has sat there in his chair, listening.
And I have told him everything. The beginning, the learning, the rush of surviving and the
pleasure of knowing ahead, the terror of know-ng things that cant be averted, the anguish of
loss. Now we sit in silence and finally he raises his head and looks at me. In Kendricks light
eyes is a sadness that I want to undo; after laying everything before him I want to take it all
back and leave, excuse him from the burden of having to think about any of this. He reaches
for his cigarettes, selects one, lights it, inhales and then exhales a blue cloud that turns white
as it crosses the path of the light along with its shadow.
Do you have difficulty sleeping? he asks me, his voice rasping from disuse.
Yes.
Is there any particular time of day that you tend to.. .vanish?
No.. .well, early morning maybe more than other times.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
229
Do you get headaches?
Yes.
Migraines?
No. Pressure headaches. With vision distortion, auras.
Hmm. Kendrick stands up. His knees crack. He paces around the office, smoking,
following the edge of the rug. Its beginning to bug me when he stops and sits down again.
Listen, he says, frowning, there are these things called clock genes. They govern
circadian rhythms, keep you in sync with the sun, that sort of thing. Weve found them in
many different types of cells, all over the body, but they are especially tied to vision, and you
seem to experience many of your symptoms visually. The suprachiasmatic nucleus of the
hypothalamus, which is located right above your optic chiasm, serves as the reset button, as it
were, of your sense of timeso thats what I want to begin with.
Um, sure, I say, since hes looking at me as though he expects a reply. Kendrick gets up
again and strides over to a door I havent noticed before, opens it and disappears for a
minute. When he returns hes holding latex gloves and a syringe.
Roll up your sleeve, Kendrick demands.
What are you doing? I ask, rolling my sleeve above my elbow. He doesnt answer,
unwraps the syringe, swabs my arm and ties it off, sticks me expertly. I look away. The sun
has passed, leaving the office in gloom.
Do you have health insurance? he asks me, removing the needle and untying my arm.
He puts cotton and a Band-Aid over the puncture.
No. Ill pay for everything myself. I press my fingers against the sore spot, bend my
elbow.
Kendrick smiles. No, no. You can be my little science experiment, hitchhike on my NIH
grant for this.
For what?
Were not going to mess around, here. Kendrick pauses, stands holding the used gloves
and the little vial of my blood that hes just drawn. Were going to have your DNA
sequenced.
I thought that took years.
It does, if youre doing the whole genome. We are going to begin by looking at the most
likely sites; Chromosome 17, for example. Kendrick throws the latex and needle in a can
labeled Biohazard and writes something on the little red vial of blood. He sits back down
across from me and places the vial on the table next to the Camels.
But the human genome wont be sequenced until 2000. What will you compare it to?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
230
2000? So soon? Youre sure? I guess you are. But to answer your question, a disease that
is asdisruptiveas yours often appears as a kind of stutter, a repeated bit of code that says,
in essence, Bad News. Huntingtons disease, for instance, is just a bunch of extra CAG
triplets on Chromosome 4.
I sit up and stretch. I could use some coffee. So thats it? Can I run away and play now?
Well, I want to have your head scanned, but not today. Ill make an appointment for you
at the hospital. MRI, CAT scan, and X-rays. Im also going to send you to a friend of mine,
Alan Larson; he has a sleep lab here on campus.
Fun  I say, standing up slowly so the blood doesnt all rush to my head.
Kendrick tilts his face up at me. I cant see his eyes, his glasses are shiny opaque disks at
this angle. It is fun, he says. Its such a great puzzle, and we finally have the tools to find
out
To find out what?
Whatever it is. Whatever you are. Kendrick smiles and I notice that his teeth are uneven
and yellowed. He stands, extends his hand, and I shake it, thank him; theres an awkward
pause: we are strangers again after the intimacies of the afternoon, and then I walk out of his
office, down stairs, into the street, where the sun has been waiting for me. Whatever I am.
What am I? What am I?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
231
A VERY SMALL SHOE
Spring, 1996 (Clare is 24, Henry is 32)
CLARE: When Henry and I had been married for about two years we decided, without talking
about it very much, to see if we could have a baby. I knew that Henry was not at all
optimistic about our chances of having a baby and I was not asking him or myself why this
might be because I was afraid that he had seen us in the future without any baby and I just
didnt want to know about that. And I didnt want to think about the possibility that Henrys
difficulties with time travel might be hereditary or somehow mess up the whole baby thing,
as it were. So I was simply not thinking about a lot of important stuff because I was
completely drunk with the notion of a baby: a baby that looked sort of like Henry, black hair
and those intense eyes and maybe very pale like me and smelled like milk and talcum
powder and skin, a sort of dumpling baby, gurgling and laughing at everyday stuff, a monkey
baby, a small cooing sort of baby. I would dream about babies. In my dreams I would climb
a tree and find a very small shoe. In a nest; I would suddenly discover that the
cat/book/sandwich I thought I Was holding was really a baby; I would be swimming in the
lake and find a colony of babies growing at the bottom.
I suddenly began to see babies everywhere; a sneezing red-haired girl in a sunbonnet at
the A&P; a tiny staring Chinese boy, son of the owners, in the Golden Wok (home of
wonderful vegetarian eggrolls); a sleeping almost bald baby at a Batman movie. In a fitting
room in a JCPenney a very trusting woman actually let me hold her three-month-old
daughter; it was all I could do to continue sitting in that pink-beige vinyl chair and not spring
up and run madly away hugging that tiny soft being to my breasts.
My body wanted a baby. I felt empty and I wanted to be full. I wanted someone to love
who would stay: stay and be there, always. And I wanted Henry to be in this child, so that
when he was gone he wouldnt be entirely gone, there would be a bit of him with me..
.insurance, in case of fire, flood, act of God.
Sunday, October 2, 1966 (Henry is 33)
HENRY: I am sitting, very comfortable and content, in a tree in Appleton, Wisconsin, in
1966, eating a tuna fish sandwich and wearing a white T-shirt and chinos stolen from
someones beautiful sun-dried laundry. Somewhere in Chicago, I am three; my mother is still
alive and none of this chrono-fuckupedness has started. I salute my small former self, and
thinking about me as a child naturally gets me thinking about Clare, and our efforts to
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
232
conceive. On one hand, I am all eagerness; I want to give Clare a baby, see Clare ripen like a
flesh melon, Demeter in glory. I want a normal baby who will do the things normal babies
do: suck, grasp, shit, sleep, laugh; roll over, sit up, walk, talk in nonsense mumblings. I want
to see my father awkwardly cradling a tiny grandchild; I have given my father so little
happinessthis would be a large redress, a balm. And a balm to Clare, too; when I am
snatched away from her, a part of me would remain.
But: but. I know, without knowing, that this is very unlikely. I know that a child of mine
is almost certainly going to be The One Most Likely to Spontaneously Vanish, a magical
disappearing baby who will evaporate as though carried off by fairies. And even as I pray,
panting and gasping over Clare in extremities of desire, for the miracle of sex to somehow
yield us a baby, a part of me is praying just as vehemently for us to be spared. I am reminded
of the story of the monkeys paw, and the three wishes that followed so naturally and
horribly from each other. I wonder if our wish is of a similar order.
I am a coward. A better man would take Clare by the shoulders and say, Love, this is all a
mistake, let us accept it and go on, and be happy. But I know that Clare would never accept,
would always be sad. And so I hope, against hope, against reason and I make love to Clare as
though anything good might come of it.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
233
ONE
Monday, June 3, 1996 (Clare is 25)
CLARE: The first time it happens Henry is away. Its the eighth week of the pregnancy. The
baby is the size of a plum, has a face and hands and a beating heart. It is early evening, early
summer, and I can see magenta and orange clouds in the west as I wash the dishes. Henry
disappeared almost two hours ago. He went out to water the lawn and after half an hour,
when I realized that the sprinkler still wasnt on, I stood at the back door and saw the telltale
pile of clothing sitting by the grape arbor. I went out and gathered up Henrys jeans and
underwear and his ratty Kill Your Television T-shirt, folded them and put them on the bed. I
thought about turning on the sprinkler but decided not to, reasoning that Henry wont like it
if he appears in the backyard and gets drenched.
I have prepared and eaten macaroni and cheese and a small salad, have taken my
vitamins, have consumed a large glass of skim milk. I hum as I do the dishes, imagine the
little being inside me hearing the humming, filing the humming away for future reference at
some subtle, cellular level and as I stand there, conscientiously washing my salad bowl I feel
a slight twinge somewhere deep inside, somewhere in my pelvis. Ten minutes later I am
sitting in the living room minding my own business and reading Louis DeBernieres and there
it is again, a brief twang on my internal strings. I ignore it. Everything is fine. Henrys been
gone for more than two hours. I worry about him for a second, then resolutely ignore that,
too. I do not start to really worry for another half hour or so, because now the weird little
sensations are resembling menstrual cramps, and I am even feeling that sticky blood feeling
between my legs and I get up and walk into the bathroom and pull down my underpants
theres a lot of blood oh my god.
I call Charisse. Gomez answers the phone. I try to sound okay, ask for Charisse, who gets
on the phone and immediately says, Whats wrong?
Im bleeding.
Wheres Henry?
I dont know.
What kind of bleeding?
Like a period. The pain is becoming intense and I sit down on the floor. Can you take
me to Illinois Masonic?
Ill be right there, Clare. She hangs up, and I replace the receiver gently, as though I
might hurt its feelings by handling it too roughly. I get to rny feet with care, find my purse. I
want to write Henry a note, but I dont know what to say. I write: Went to IL Masonic.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
234
(Cramps.) Charisse drove me there. 7:20 p.m. C. I unlock the back door for Henry. I leave
the note by the phone. A few minutes later Charisse is at the front door. When we get to the
car, Gomez is driving. We dont talk much. I sit in the front seat, look out the window.
Western to Belmont to Sheffield to Wellington. Everything is unusually sharp and emphatic,
as though I need to remember as though there will be a test. Gomez turns into the Unloading
Zone Or the Emergency Room. Charisse and I get out. I look back at Gomez, smiles briefly
and roars off to park the car. We walk through doors that open automatically as our feet press
the ground, as in a fairy tale, as though we are expected. The pain has receded like an ebbing
tide, and now it moves toward the shore again, fresh and fierce. There are a few people
sitting abject and small in the brightly lit room, waiting their turn, encircling their pain with
bowed heads and crossed arms, and I sink down among them. Charisse walks over to the
man sitting behind the triage desk. I cant hear what she says, but when he says
Miscarriage? it dawns on me that this is what is going on, this is what it is called, and the
word expands in my head until it fills all crevices of my mind, until it has crowded out every
other thought. I start to cry.
After theyve done everything they could, it happens anyway. I find out later that Henry
arrived just before the end, but they wouldnt let him come in. I have been sleeping, and
when I wake up its late at night and Henry is there. He is pale and hollow-eyed and he
doesnt say a word. Oh, I mumble, where were you? and Henry leans over and carefully
embraces me. I feel his stubble against my cheek and I am rubbed raw, not on my skin but
deep in me, a wound opens and Henrys face is wet but with whose tears?
Thursday, June 13 and Friday, June 14, 1996 (Henry is 32)
HENRY: I arrive at the sleep lab exhausted, as Dr. Kendrick has asked me to. This is the fifth
night Ive spent here, and by now I know the routine. I sit on the bed in the odd, fake, homelike
bedroom wearing pajama bottoms while Dr. Larsons lab technician, Karen, puts cream
on my head and chest and tapes wires in place. Karen is young and blond and Vietnamese.
Shes wearing long fake fingernails and says, Oops, sorry, when she rakes my cheek with
one of them. The lights are dim, the room is cool. There are no windows except a piece of
one-way glass that looks like a mirror, behind which sits Dr. Larson, or whoevers watching
the machines this evening. Karen finishes the wiring, bids me good night, leaves the room. I
settle into the bed carefully, close my eyes, imagine the spider-legged tracings on long
streams of graph paper gracefully recording my eye movements, respiration, brain waves on
the other side of the glass. Im asleep within minutes.
I dream of running. Im running through woods, dense brush, trees, but somehow I am
running through all of it, passing through like a ghost. I burst into a clearing, theres been a
fire
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
235
I dream I am having sex with Ingrid. I know its Ingrid, even though I cant see her face,
it is Ingrid body, Ingrids long smooth legs. We are fucking in her parents house, in their
living room on the couch, the TV is on, tuned to a nature documentary in which a herd of
antelope is running, and then theres a parade. Clare is sitting on a tiny float in the parade,
looking sad while people are cheering all around her and suddenly Ing jumps up and pulls a
bow and arrow from behind the couch and she shoots Clare. The arrow goes right into the
TV and Clare claps her hands to her breast like Wendy in a silent version of Peter Pan and I
leap up and Im choking Ingrid, my hands around her throat, screaming at her
I wake up. Im cold with sweat and my heart is pounding. Im in the sleep lab. I wonder
for a moment if theres something theyre not telling me, if they can somehow watch my
dreams, see my thoughts. I turn onto my side and close my eyes.
I dream that Clare and I are walking through a museum. The museum is an old palace, all
the paintings are in rococo gold frames, all the other visitors are wearing tall powdered wigs
and immense dresses, frock coats, and breeches. They dont seem to notice us as we pass.
We look at the paintings, but they arent really paintings, theyre poems, poems somehow
given physical manifestation. Look, I say to Clare, theres an Emily Dickinson. The
heart asks pleasure first; And then excuse from pain...She stands in front of the bright yellow
poem and seems to warm herself by it.
We see Dante, Donne, Blake, Neruda, Bishop; linger in a room full of Rilke, pass quickly
through the Beats and pause before Verlaine and Baudelaire. I suddenly realize that Ive lost
Clare, I am walking, then running, back through the galleries and then I abruptly find her:
she is standing before a poem, a tiny white poem tucked into a corner. She is weeping. As I
come up behind her I see the poem: Now I lay me down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to
keep, If I should die before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take.
Im thrashing in grass, its cold, wind rushes over me, Im naked and cold in darkness,
theres snow on the ground, I am on my knees in the snow, blood drips onto the snow and I
reach out
My god, hes bleeding
How the hell did that happen?
Shit, hes ripped off all the electrodes, help me get him back on the bed
I open my eyes. Kendrick and Dr. Larson are crouched over me. Dr. Larson looks upset
and worried, but Kendrick has a jubilant smile on his face.
Did you get it? I ask, and he replies, It was perfect. I say, Great, and then I pass out.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
236
TWO
Sunday, October 12, 1997 (Henry is 34, Clare is 26)
HENRY: I wake up and smell iron and its blood. Blood is everywhere and Clare is curled up
in the middle of it like a kitten.
I shake her and she says, No.
ComeonClarewakeupyourebleeding.
I was dreaming...
Clare, please...
She sits up. Her hands, her face, her hair are drenched in blood. Clare holds out her hand
and on it reclines a tiny monster. She says, simply, He died, and bursts into tears. We sit
together on the edge of the blood-soaked bed, holding each other, and crying.
Monday, February 16, 1998 (Clare is 26, Henry is 34)
CLARE: Henry and I are just about to go out. Its a snowy afternoon, and Im pulling on my
boots when the phone rings. Henry walks down the hall and into the living room to answer it.
I hear him say,
Hello? and then Really? and then Well, hot damn! Then he says, Wait, let me get
some paper and theres a long silence, punctuated once in a while with Wait, explain
that and I take off my boots and my coat and pad into the living room in my socks. Henry is
sitting on the couch with the phone cradled in his lap like a pet, furiously taking notes, I sit
down next to him and he grins at me. I look at the pad; the top of the page starts off: 4 genes:
pert, timeless!, Clock, new gene-time traveler?? Chrom-17 x 2, 4, 25, 200+ repeats TAG, sex
linked? no, +too many dopamine recpts, what proteins???... and I realize: Kendrick has done
it! Hes figured it out! I cant believe it. Hes done it. Now what?
Henry puts down the phone, turns to me. He looks as stunned as I feel.
What happens next? I ask him.
Hes going to clone the genes and put them into mice.
What?
Hes going to make time-traveling mice. Then hes going to cure them.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
237
We both start to laugh at the same time, and then we are dancing, flinging each other
around the room, laughing and dancing until we fall back onto the couch, panting. I look
over at Henry, and I wonder that on a cellular level he is so different, so other, when hes just
a man in a white button-down shirt and a pea jacket whose hand feels like skin and bone in
mine, a man who smiles just like a human. I always knew he was different, what does it
matter? a few letters of code? but somehow it must matter, and somehow we must change it,
and somewhere on the other side of the city Dr. Kendrick is sitting in his office figuring out
how to make mice that defy the rules of time. I laugh, but its life and death, and I stop
laughing and put my hand over my mouth.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
238
INTERMEZZO
Wednesday, August 12, 1998 (Clare is 27)
CLARE: Mama is asleep, finally. She sleeps in her own bed, in her own room; she has
escaped from the hospital, at last, only to find her room, her refuge, transformed into a
hospital room. But now she is past knowing. All night she talked, wept, laughed, yelled,
called out Philip!
and Mama! and No, no, no... All night the cicadas and the tree frogs of my childhood
pulsed their electric curtain of sound and the night light made her skin look like beeswax, her
bone hands flailing in supplication, clutching at the glass of water I held to her crusted lips.
Now it is dawn. Mamas window looks out over the east. I sit in the white chair, by the
window, facing the bed, but not looking, not looking at Mama so effaced in her big bed, not
looking at the pill bottles and the spoons and the glasses and the IV pole with the bag
hanging obese with fluid and the blinking red LED display and the bed pan and the little
kidney-shaped receptacle for vornit and the box of latex gloves and the trash can with the
BIOHAZARD warning label full of bloody syringes. I am looking out the window, toward the
east. A few birds are singing. I can hear the doves that live in the wisteria waking up. The
world is gray. Slowly color leaks into it, not rosy-fingered but like a slowly spreading stain
of blood orange, one moment lingering at the horizon and then flooding the garden and then
golden light, and then a blue sky, and then all the colors vibrant in their assigned places, the
trumpet vines, the roses, the white salvia, the marigolds, all shimmering in the new morning
dew like glass. The silver birches at the edges of the woods dangle like white strings
suspended from the sky. A crow flies across the grass. Its shadow flies under it, and meets it
as it lands under the window and caws, once. Light finds the window, and creates my hands,
my body heavy in Mamas white chair. The sun is up.
I close my eyes. The air conditioner purrs. Im cold, and I get up and walk to the other
window, and turn it off. Now the room is silent. I walk to the bed. Mama is still. The
laborious breathing that has haunted my dreams has stopped. Her mouth is open slightly and
her eyebrows are raised as though in surprise, although her eyes are closed; she could be
singing. I kneel by the bed, I pull back the covers and lay my ear against her heart. Her skin
is warm. Nothing. No heart beats, no blood moves, no breath inflates the sails of her lungs.
Silence.
I gather up her reeking, wasted body into my arms, and she is perfect, she is my own
perfect beautiful Mama again, for just a moment, even as her bones jut against my breasts
and her head lolls, even as her cancer-laden belly mimics fecundity she rises up in memory
shining, laughing, released: free.
Footsteps in the hall. The door opens and Ettas voice.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
239
Clare? Oh!
I lower Mama back to the pillows, smooth her nightgown, her hair.
Shes gone.
Saturday, September 12, 1998 (Henry is 35, Clare is 27)
HENRY: Lucille was the one who loved the garden. When we came to visit, Clare would walk
through the front door of the Meadowlark House and straight out the back door to find
Lucille, who was almost always in the garden, rain or shine. When she was well we would
find her kneeling in the beds, weeding or moving plants or feeding the roses. When she was
ill Etta and Philip would bring her downstairs wrapped in quilts and seat her in her wicker
chair, sometimes by the fountain, sometimes under the pear tree where she could see Peter
working, digging and pruning and grafting. When Lucille was well she would regale us with
the doings of the garden: the red-headed finches who had finally discovered the new feeder,
the dahlias that had done better than expected over by the sundial, the new rose that turned
out to be a horrible shade of lavender but was so vigorous that she was loathe to get rid of it.
One summer Lucille and Alicia conducted an experiment: Alicia spent several hours each
day practicing the cello in the garden, to see if the plants would respond to the music. Lucille
swore that her tomatoes had never been so plentiful, and she showed us a zucchini that was
the size of my thigh. So the experiment was deemed a success, but was never repeated
because it was the last summer Lucille was well enough to garden.
Lucille waxed and waned with the seasons, like a plant. In the summer, when we all
showed up, Lucille would rally and the house rang with the happy shouts and pounding of
Mark and Sharons children, who tumbled like puppies in the fountain and cavorted sticky
and ebullient on the lawn. Lucille was often grimy but always elegant. She would rise to
greet us, her white and copper hair in a thick coil with fat strands straggling into her face,
white kidskin gardening gloves and Smith & Hawken tools thrown down as she received our
hugs. Lucille and I always kissed very formally, on both cheeks, as though we were very old
French countesses who hadnt seen each other in a while. She was never less than kind to
me, although she could devastate her daughter with a glance. I miss her. Clare.. .well, miss
is inadequate. Clare is bereft. Clare walks into rooms and forgets why she is there. Clare sits
staring at a book without turning a page for an hour. But she doesnt cry. Clare smiles if I
make a joke. Clare eats what I put in front of her. If I try to make love to her Clare will try to
go along with it...and soon I leave her alone, afraid of the docile, tearless face that seems to
be miles away. I miss Lucille, but it is Clare I am bereft of, Clare who has gone away and left
me with this stranger who only looks like Clare.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
240
Wednesday, November 26, 1998 (Clare is 27, Henry is 35)
CLARE: Mamas room is white and bare. All the medical paraphernalia is gone. The bed is
stripped down to the mattress, which is stained and ugly in the clean room. Im standing in
front of Mamas desk. Its a heavy white Formica desk, modern and strange in an otherwise
feminine and delicate room full of antique French furniture. Mamas desk stands in a little
bay, windows embrace it, morning light washes across its empty surface. The desk is locked.
I have spent an hour looking for the key, with no luck. I lean my elbows on the back of
Mamas swivel chair, and stare at the desk. Finally, I go downstairs. The living room and
dining room are empty. I hear laughter in the kitchen, so I push the door open. Henry and
Nell are huddled over a cluster of bowls and a pastry cloth and a rolling pin.
Easy, boy, easy! You gonna toughen em up, you go at em like that. You need a light
touch, Henry, or they gonna have a texture like bubble gum.
Sorry sorry sorry. I will be light, just dont whack me like that. Hey, Clare. Henry turns
around smiling and I see that he is covered with flour.
What are you making?
Croissants. I have sworn to master the art of folding pastry dough or perish in the
attempt.
Rest in peace, son, says Nell, grinning.
Whats up? Henry asks as Nell efficiently rolls out a ball of dough and folds it and cuts
it and wraps it in waxed paper.
I need to borrow Henry for a couple of minutes, Nell. Nell nods and points her rolling
pin at Henry. Come back in fifteen minutes and well start the marinade.
Yesm.
Henry follows me upstairs. We stand in front of Mamas desk.
I want to open it and I cant find the keys.
Ah. He darts a look at me, so quick I cant read it. Well, thats easy. Henry leaves the
room and is back in minutes. He sits on the floor in front of Mamas desk, straightening out
two large paper clips. He starts with the bottom left drawer, carefully probing and turning
one paper clip, and then sticks the other one in after it.  Voila he says, pulling on the
drawer. Its bursting with paper. Henry opens the other four drawers without any fuss. Soon
they are all gaping, their contents exposed: notebooks, loose-leaf papers, gardening catalogs,
seed packets, pens and short pencils, a checkbook, a Hersheys candy bar, a tape measure,
and a number of other small items that now seem forlorn and shy in the daylight. Henry
hasnt touched anything in the drawers. He looks at me; I glance at the door almost
involuntarily and Henry takes the hint. I turn to Mamas desk.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
241
The papers are in no order at all. I sit on the floor and pile the contents of a drawer in
front of me. Everything with her handwriting on it I smooth and pile on my left. Some of it is
lists, and notes to herself: Do not ask P about S. Or: Remind Etta dinner Bs Friday. There
are pages and pages of doodles, spirals and squiggles, black circles, marks like the feet of
birds. Some of these have a sentence or a phrase embedded in them. To part her hair with a
knife. And: couldnt couldnt do it. And: 7/7 am quiet it will pass me by. Some sheets are
poems so heavily marked and crossed out that very little remains, like fragments of Sappho:
Like old meat, relaxed and tender
no air XXXXXXX she said yes
she said XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Or:
his hand XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
in extreme XXXXXXXXXX
Some poems have been typed:
At the moment
all hope is weak
and small.
Music and beauty
are salt in my sadness;
a white void rips through my ice.
Who could have said
that the angel of sex
was so sad?
or known desire
would melt this vast
winter night into
a flood of darkness.
1/23/79
The spring garden:
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
242
a ship of summer
swimming through
my winter vision.
4/6/79
1979 was the year Mama lost the baby and tried to kill herself. My stomach aches and my
eyes blur. I know now how it was with her then. I take all of those papers and put them aside
without reading any more. In another drawer I find more recent poems. And then I find a
poem addressed to me:
The Garden Under Snow
for clare
now the garden is under snow
a blank page our footprints write on
clare who was never mine
but always belonged to herself
Sleeping Beauty
a crystalline blanket
she waits
this is her spring
this is her sleeping/awakening
she is waiting
everything is waiting
for a kiss
the improbable shapes of tubers roots
I-never thought
my baby
her almost face
a garden, waiting
HENRY: Its almost dinner time and Im in Nells way, so when she says, Shouldnt you go
see what your woman is up to? it seems like a good idea to go and find out.
Clare is sitting on the floor in front of her mothers desk surrounded by white and yellow
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
243
papers. The desk lamp throws a pool of light around her, but her face is in shadow; her hair a
flaming copper aura. She looks up at me, holds out a piece of paper, and says, Look, Henry,
she wrote me a poem. As I sit beside Clare and read the poem I forgive Lucille, a little, for
her colossal selfishness and her monstrous dying, and I look up at Clare. Its beautiful, I
say, and she nods, satisfied, for a moment, that her mother really did love her. I think about
my mother singing lieder after lunch on a summer afternoon, smiling at our reflection in a
shop window, twirling in a blue dress across the floor of her dressing room. She loved me. I
never questioned her love. Lucille was changeable as wind. The poem Clare holds is
evidence, immutable, undeniable, a snapshot of an emotion. I look around at the pools of
paper on the floor and I am relieved that something in this mess has risen to the surface to be
Clares lifeboat.
She wrote me a poem, Clare says, again, in wonder. Tears are streaking down her
cheeks. I put my arms around her, and shes back, my wife, Clare, safe and sound, on the
shore at last after the shipwreck, weeping like a little girl whose mother is waving to her
from the deck of the foundering boat.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
244
NEW YEARS EVE, ONE
Friday, December 31, 1999, 11:55p.m. (Henry is 36, Clare is 28)
HENRY: Clare and I are standing on a rooftop in Wicker Park with a multitude of other hardy
souls, awaiting the turn of the so-called millennium. Its a clear night, and not that cold; I can
see my breath, and my ears and nose are a bit numb. Clare is all muffled up in her big black
scarf and her face is startlingly white in the moon/street light. The rooftop belongs to a
couple of Clares artist friends. Gomez and Charisse are nearby, slow-dancing in parkas and
mittens to music only they can hear. Everyone around us is drunkenly bantering about the
canned goods they nave stockpiled, the heroic measures they have taken to protect their
computers from meltdown. I smile to myself, knowing that all this millennial nonsense will
be completely forgotten by the time the Christmas trees are Picked up off the curbs by Streets
and San.
We are waiting for the fireworks to begin. Clare and I lean against the waist-high false
front of the building and survey the City of Chicago. We are facing east, looking toward
Lake Michigan. Hello, everybody Clare says, waving her mitten at the lake, at South
Haven, Michigan. Its funny,
she says to me. Its already the new year there. Im sure theyre all in bed. We are six
stories up, and I am surprised by how much I can see from here. Our house, in Lincoln
Square, is somewhere to the north and west of here; our neighborhood is quiet and dark.
Downtown, to the southeast, is sparkling. Some of the huge buildings are decorated for
Christmas, sporting green and red lights in their windows. The Sears and The Hancock stare
at each other like giant robots over the heads of lesser skyscrapers. I can almost see the
building I lived in when I met Clare, on North Dearborn, but its obscured by the taller,
uglier building they put up a few years ago next to it. Chicago has so much excellent
architecture that they feel obliged to tear some of it down now and then and erect terrible
buildings just to help us all appreciate the good stuff. There isnt much traffic; everyone
wants to be somewhere at midnight, not on the road. I can hear bursts of firecrackers here
and there, punctuated occasionally with gunfire from the morons who seem to forget that
guns do more than make loud noises. Clare says, Im freezing and looks at her watch.
Two more minutes. Bursts of celebration around the neighborhood indicate that some
peoples watches are fast.
I think about Chicago in the next century. More people, many more. Ridiculous traffic,
but fewer potholes. There will be a hideous building that looks like an exploding Coke can in
Grant Park; the West Side will slowly rise out of poverty and the South Side will continue to
decay. They will finally tear down Wrigley Field and build an ugly megastadium, but for
now it stands blazing with light in the Northeast.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
245
Gomez begins the countdown: Ten, nine, eight... and we all take it up: seven, six, five,
four, THREE! TWO! ONE! Happy New Year! Champagne corks pop, fireworks ignite and
streak across the sky, and Clare and I dive into each others arms. Time stands still, and I
hope for better things to come.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
246
THREE
Saturday, March 13, 1999 (Henry is 35, Clare is 27)
HENRY: Charisse and Gomez have just had their third child, Rosa Evangeline Gomolinski.
We allow a week to pass, then descend on them with presents and food.
Gomez answers the door. Maximilian, three years old, is clinging to his leg, and hides his
face behind Gomezs knee when we say Hi Max! Joseph, more extroverted at one, races up
to Clare babbling Ba ba ba and burps loudly as she picks him up. Gomez rolls his eyes, and
Clare laughs, and Joe laughs, and even I have to laugh at the complete chaos. Their house
looks as though a glacier with a Toys R Us store inside it has moved through, leaving
pools of Legos and abandoned stuffed bears.
Dont look, says Gomez. None of this is real. Were just testing one of Charisses
virtual reality games. We call it Parenthood.
Gomez? Charisses voice floats out of the bedroom. Is that Clare and Henry?
We all tromp down the hall and into the bedroom. I catch a glimpse of the kitchen as we
pass. A middle-aged woman is standing at the sink, washing dishes.
Charisse is lying in bed with the baby in her arms. The baby is asleep. She is tiny and has
black hair and a sort of Aztec look about her. Max and Joe are light-haired. Charisse looks
awful (to me. Clare insists later that she looked wonderful). She has gained a lot of weight
and looks exhausted and ill. She has had a Caesarean. I sit down on the chair. Clare and
Gomez sit on the bed. Max clambers over to his mother and snuggles under her free arm. He
stares at me and puts his thumb in his mouth. Joe is sitting on Gomezs lap.
Shes beautiful, says Clare. Charisse smiles. And you look great.
I feel like shit says Charisse. But Im done. We got our girl. She strokes the babys
face, and Rosa yawns and raises one tiny hand. Her eyes are dark slits.
Rosa Evangeline, Clare coos to the baby. Thats so pretty.
Gomez wanted to name her Wednesday, but I put my foot down, says Charisse.
Well, she was born on a Thursday, anyway explains Gomez.
Wanna hold her? Clare nods, and Charisse carefully hands her daughter into Clares
arms.
Seeing Clare with a baby in her arms, the reality of our miscarriages grabs me and for a
moment I feel nauseous. I hope Im not about to time travel. The feeling retreats and I am left
with the actuality of what weve been doing: we have been losing children. Where are they,
these lost children, wandering, hovering around confused?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
247
Henry, would you like to hold Rosa? Clare asks me.
I panic. No, I say, too emphatically. Im not feeling so hot, I explain. I get up and
walk out of the bedroom, through the kitchen and out the back door. I stand in the backyard.
It is raining lightly. I stand and breathe.
The back door slams. Gomez comes out and stands beside me.
You okay? he asks.
I think so. I was getting claustrophobic in there.
Yeah, I know what you mean.
We stand silently for minutes. I am trying to remember my father holding me when I was
little. All I can remember is playing games with him, running, laughing, riding around on his
shoulders. I realize that Gomez is looking at me, and that tears are coursing down my cheeks.
I wipe my sleeve across my face. Somebody has to say something.
Dont mind me, I say.
Gomez makes an awkward gesture. Ill be right back, he says, and disappears into the
house. I think hes gone for good, but he reappears with a lit cigarette in hand. I sit down on
the decrepit picnic table, which is damp with rain and covered with pine needles. Its cold out
here.
You guys still trying to have a kid?
I am startled by this until I realize that Clare probably tells Charisse everything, and
Charisse probably tells Gomez nothing.
Yeah.
Is Clare still upset about that miscarriage?
Miscarriages. Plural. Weve had three.
To lose one child, Mr. DeTamble, may be regarded as a misfortune; to lose three looks
like carelessness.
Thats not really all that funny, Gomez.
Sorry. Gomez does look abashed, for once. I dont want to talk about this. I have no
words to talk about it, and I can barely talk about it with Clare, with Kendrick and the other
doctors at whose feet weve laid our sad case. Sorry, Gomez repeats.
I stand up. Wed better go in.
Ah, they dont want us, they want to talk about girl stuff.
Mmm. Well, then. How about those Cubs? I sit down again.
Shut up. Neither of us follows baseball. Gomez is pacing back and forth. I wish he
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
248
would stop, or, better yet, go inside. So whats the problem? he asks, casually.
With what? The Cubs? No pitching, Id say.
No, dear Library Boy, not the Cubs. What is the problem that is causing you and Clare to
be sans infants?
That is really not any of your business, Gomez.
He plunges on, unfazed. Do they even know what the problem is?
Fuck off, Gomez
Tut, tut. Language. Because I know this great doctor....
Gomez
Who specializes in fetal chromosomal disorders.
Why on earth would you know
Expert witness.
Oh.
Her name is Amit Montague  he continues, shes a genius. Shes been on TV and won
all these awards. Juries adore her.
Oh, well, if juries love her I begin, sarcastically.
Just go and see her. Jesus, Im trying to be helpful.
I sigh. Okay. Um, thanks.
Is that Thanks, we will run right out and do as you suggest, dear Comrade, or Thanks,
now go screw yourself?
I stand up, brush damp pine needles off the seat of my pants. Lets go in, I say, and we
do.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
249
FOUR
Wednesday, July 21, 1999/September 8, 1998 (Henry is 36, Clare is 28)
HENRY: We are lying in bed. Clare is curled on her side, her back to me, and I am curled
around her, facing her back. Its about two in the morning, and we have just turned out the
light after a long and pointless discussion of our reproductive misadventures. Now I lie
pressed against Clare, my hand cupping her right breast, and I try to discern if we are in this
together or if I have been somehow left behind.
Clare, I say softly, into her neck.
Mmm?
Lets adopt. Ive been thinking about this for weeks, months. It Ferris like a brilliant
escape route: we will have a baby. It will be healthy. Clare will be healthy. We will be
happy. It is the obvious answer.
Clare says, But that would be fake. It would be pretending. She sits UP faces me, and I
do the same.
It would be a real baby, and it would be ours. Whats pretend about that? Im sick of
pretending. We pretend all the time. I want to really do this.
We dont pretend all the time. What are you talking about?
We pretend to be normal people, having normal lives! I pretend its perfectly okay with
me that youre always disappearing God knows where. You pretend everything is okay even
when you almost get killed and Kendrick doesnt know what the hell to do about it! I pretend
I dont care when our babies die... She is sobbing, bent double, her face covered by her hair,
a curtain of silk sheltering her face.
Im tired of crying. Im tired of watching Clare cry. I am helpless before her tears, there is
nothing I can do that will change anything.
Clare...I reach out to touch her, to comfort her, to comfort myself, and she pushes me
away. I get out of bed, and grab my clothes. I dress in the bathroom. I take Clares keys from
her purse, and I put on my shoes. Clare appears in the hall.
Where are you going?
I dont know.
Henry
I walk out the door, and slam it. It feels good to be outside. I cant remember where the
car is. Then I see it across the street. I walk over to it and get in.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
250
My first idea was to sleep in the car, but once I am sitting in it I decide to drive
somewhere. The beach: I will drive to the beach. I know that this is a terrible idea. Im tired,
Im upset, it would be madness to drive...but I just feel like driving. The streets are empty. I
start the car. It roars to life. It takes me a minute to get out of the parking space. I see Clares
face in the front window. Let her worry. For once I dont care.
I drive down Ainslie to Lincoln, cut over to Western, and drive north. Its been a while
since Ive been out alone in the middle of the night in the present, and I cant even remember
the last time I drove a car when I didnt absolutely have to. This is nice. I speed past Rosehill
Cemetery and down the long corridor of car dealerships. I turn on the radio, punch through
the presets to WLUW; theyre playing Coltrane so I crank up the volume and wind the
window down. The noise, the wind, the soothing repetition of stoplights and streetlights
make me calm, anesthetize me, and after a while I kind of forget why Im out here in the first
place. At the Evanston border I cut over to Ridge, and then take Dempster to the lake. I park
near the lagoon, leave the keys in the ignition, get out, and walk. Its cool and very quiet. I
walk out onto the pier and stand at the end of it, looking down the shoreline at Chicago,
flickering under its orange and purple sky.
Im so tired. Im tired of thinking about death. Im tired of sex as a means to an end. And
Im frightened of where it all might end. I dont know how much pressure I can take from
Clare.
What are these fetuses, these embryos, these clusters of cells we keep making and losing?
What is it about them that is important enough to risk Clares life, to tinge every day with
despair? Nature is telling us to give up, Nature is saying: Henry, youre a very fucked-up
organism and we dont want to make any more of you. And I am ready to acquiesce.
I have never seen myself in the future with a child. Even though I have spent quite a bit of
time with my young self, even though I spend a lot of time with Clare as a child, I dont feel
like my life is incomplete without one of my very own. No future self has ever encouraged
me to keep plugging away at this. I actually broke down and asked, a few weeks ago; I ran
into my self in the stacks at the Newberry, a self from 2004. Are we ever going to have a
baby? I asked. My self only smiled and shrugged. You just have to live it, sorry, he replied,
smug and sympathetic. Oh, Jesus, just tell me I cried, raising my voice as he raised his hand
and disappeared. Asshole, I said loudly, and Isabelle stuck her head in the security door and
asked me why I was yelling in the stacks and did I realize that they could hear me in the
Reading Room?
I just dont see any way out of this. Clare is obsessed. Amit Montague encourages her,
tells her stories about miracle babies, gives her vitamin drinks that remind me of Rosemary s
Baby. Maybe I could go on strike. Sure, thats it; a sex strike. I laugh to myself. The sound is
swallowed by the waves gently lapping the pier. Fat chance. Id be groveling on my knees
within days.
My head hurts. I try to ignore it; I know its because Im tired. I wonder if I could sleep
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
251
on the beach without anyone bothering me. Its a beautiful night. Just at this moment I am
startled by an intense beam of light that pans across the pier and into my face and suddenly
Im in Kimys kitchen, lying on my back under her kitchen table, surrounded by the legs of
chairs. Kimy is seated in one of the chairs and is peering at me under the table. My left hip is
pressing against her shoes.
Hi, buddy, I say weakly. I feel like Im about to pass out.
You gonna give me a heart attack one of these days, buddy, Kimy says. She prods me
with her foot. Get out from under there and put on some clothes.
I flop over and back out from under the table on my knees. Then I curl up on the linoleum
and rest for a moment, gathering my wits and trying not to gag.
Henry.. .you okay? She leans over me. You want something to eat? You want some
soup? I got minestrone soup...Coffee? I shake my head. You want to lie on the couch? You
sick?
No, Kimy, its okay, Ill be okay. I manage to get to my knees and then to my feet. I
stagger into the bedroom and open Mr. Kims closet, which is almost empty except for a few
pairs of neatly pressed jeans in various sizes ranging from small boy to grown-up, and
several crisp white shirts, my little clothing stash, ready and waiting. Dressed, I walk back to
the kitchen, lean over Kimy, and give her a peck on the cheek. Whats the date?
September 8, 1998. Where you from?
Next July. We sit down at the table. Kimy is doing the New York Times crossword
puzzle.
Whats going on, next July?
Its been a very cool summer, your gardens looking good. All the tech stocks are up.
You should buy some Apple stock in January.
She makes a note on a piece of brown paper bag. Okay. And you? How are you doing?
Hows Clare? You guys got a baby yet?
Actually, I am hungry. How about some of that soup you were mentioning?
Kimy lumbers out of her chair and opens the fridge. She gets out a saucepan and starts to
heat up some soup. You didnt answer my question.
No news, Kimy. No baby. Clare and I fight about it just about every waking moment.
Please dont start on me.
Kimy has her back to me. She stirs the soup vigorously. Her back radiates chagrin. Im
not starting on you, I just ask, okay? I just wondering. Sheesh.
We are silent for a few minutes. The noise of the spoon scraping the bottom of the
saucepan is getting to me. I think about Clare, looking out the window at me as I drove away.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
252
Hey, Kimy.
Hey, Henry.
How come you and Mr. Kim never had kids?
Long silence. Then: We did have child.
You did?
She pours the steaming soup into one of the Mickey Mouse bowls I loved when I was a
kid. She sits down and runs her hands over her hair, smoothes the white straggling hairs into
the little bun at the back. Kimy looks at me. Eat your soup. I be right back. She gets up and
walks out of the kitchen, and I hear her shuffling down the plastic runner that covers the
carpeting in the hall. I eat the soup. Its almost gone when she comes back.
Here. This is Min. She is my baby. The photograph is black and white, blurry. In it a
young girl, perhaps five or six years old, stands in front of Mrs. Kims building, this
building, the building I grew up in. She is wearing a Catholic school uniform, smiling, and
holding an umbrella. Its her first day school. She is so happy, so scared.
I study the photo. I am afraid to ask. I look up. Kimy is staring out the window, over the
river. What happened?
Oh. She died. Before you were born. She had leukemia, she die.
I suddenly remember. Did she used to sit out in a rocker in the backyard? In a red
dress?
Mrs. Kim stares at me, startled. You see her?
Yes, I think so. A long time ago. When I was about seven. I was standing on the steps to
the river, buck naked, and she told me I better not come into her yard, and I told her it was
my yard and she didnt believe me. I couldnt figure it out. I laugh. She told me her mom
was gonna spank me if I didnt go away.
Kimy laughs shakily. Well, she right, huh?
Yeah, she was just off by a few years.
Kimy smiles. Yeah, Min, she a little firecracker. Her dad call her Miss Big Mouth. He
loved her very much. Kimy turns her head, surreptitiously touches her hand to her eyes. I
remember Mr. Kim as a taciturn man who spent most of his time sitting in his armchair
watching sports on TV.
What year was Min born?
1949. She died 1956. Funny, she would be middle-aged lady with kids now, herself. She
would be forty-nine years old. Kids would be maybe in college, maybe a little older. Kimy
looks at me, and I look back at her.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
253
Were trying, Kimy. Were trying everything we can think of.
I didnt say nothing.
Uh-huh.
Kimy bats her eyelashes at me like shes Louise Brooks or somebody. Hey, buddy, I am
stuck on this crossword. Nine down, starts with K
CLARE: I watch the police divers swim out into Lake Michigan. Its an overcast morning,
already very hot. I am standing on the Dempster Street pier. There are five fire engines, three
ambulances, and seven squad cars standing on Sheridan Road with their lights blinking and
flashing. There are seventeen firemen and six paramedics. There are fourteen policemen and
one policewoman, a short fat white woman whose head seems squashed by her cap, who
keeps saying stupid platitudes intended to comfort me until I want to push her off the pier.
Im holding Henrys clothes. Its five oclock in the morning. There are twenty-one reporters,
some of whom are TV reporters with trucks and microphones and video people, and some of
whom are print reporters with photographers. There is an elderly couple hanging around the
edges of the action, discreet but curious. I try not to think about the policemans description
of Henry jumping off the end of the pier, caught in the beam of the police car searchlight. I
try not to think.
Two new policemen come walking down the pier. They confer with some of the police
who are already here, and then one of them, the older one, detaches and walks to me. He has
a handlebar mustache, the old-fashioned kind that ends in little points. He introduces himself
as Captain Michels, and asks me if I can think of any reason my husband might have wanted
to take his own life.
Well, I really dont think he did, Captain. I mean, hes a very good swimmer, hes
probably just swimming to, urn, Wilmette or someplace
I wave my hand vaguely to the northand hell be back any time now....
The Captain looks dubious. Does he make a habit of swimming in toe middle of the
night? Hes an insomniac. Had you been arguing? Was he upset?
No, I lie. Of course not. I look out over the water. I am sure I dont sound very
convincing. I was sleeping and he must have decided to go swimming and he didnt want to
wake me up.
Did he leave a note?
No. As I rack my brains for a more realistic explanation I hear a splash near the shore.
Hallelujah. Not a moment too soon. There he is! Henry starts to stand up in the water,
hears me yell, and ducks down again and swims to the pier.
Clare. Whats going on?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
254
I kneel on the pier. Henry looks tired, and cold. I speak quietly. They thought you
drowned. One of them saw you throw yourself off the pier. Theyve been searching for your
body for two hours.
Henry looks worried, but also amused. Anything to annoy the police. All the police have
clustered around me and they are peering down at Henry silently.
Are you Henry DeTamble? asks the captain.
Yes. Would you mind if I got out of the water? We all follow Henry to the shore, Henry
swimming and the rest of us walking along beside him on the pier. He climbs out of the
water and stands dripping on the beach like a wet rat. I hand him his shirt, which he uses to
dry himself off. He puts on the rest of his clothes, and stands calmly, waiting for the police to
figure out what they want to do with him. I want to kiss him and then kill him. Or vice versa.
Henry puts his arm around me. He is clammy and damp. I lean close to him, for his coolness,
and he leans into me, for warmth. The police ask him questions. He answers them very
politely. These are the Evanston police, with a few Morton Grove and Skokie police who
have come by just for the heck of it. If they were Chicago police they would know Henry,
and they would arrest him.
Why didnt you respond when the officer told you to get out of the water?
I was wearing earplugs, Captain.
Earplugs?
To keep the water out of my ears. Henry makes a show of digging in his pockets. I
dont know where they got to. I always wear earplugs when I swim.
Why were you swimming at three oclock in the morning?
I couldnt sleep 
And so on. Henry lies seamlessly, marshaling the facts to support his thesis. In the end,
grudgingly, the police issue him a citation, for swimming when the beach is officially closed.
Its a $500 fine. When the police let us go, the reporters and photographers and TV cameras
converge on us as we walk to the car. No comment. Just out for a swim. Please, we would
really rather not have our picture taken. Click. We finally make it to the car, which is sitting
all by itself with the keys in it on Sheridan Road. I start the ignition and roll down my
window. The police and the reporters and the elderly couple are all standing on the grass,
watching us. We are not looking at each other.
Clare.
Henry.
Im sorry.
Me too. He looks over at me, touches my hand on the steering wheel. We drive home in
silence.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
255
Friday, January 14, 2000 (Clare is 28, Henry is 36)
CLARE: Kendrick leads us through a maze of carpeted, drywalled, acoustical-tiled hallways
and into a conference room. There are no windows, only blue carpet and a long, polished
black table surrounded by padded swivel chairs. Theres a whiteboard and a few Magic
Markers, a clock over the door, and a coffee urn with cups, cream, and sugar ready beside it.
Kendrick and I sit at the table, but Henry paces around the room. Kendrick takes off his
glasses and massages the sides of his small nose with his fingers. The door opens and a
young Hispanic man in surgical scrubs wheels a cart into the room. On the cart is a cage
covered with a cloth. Where dya want it? the young man asks, and Kendrick says, Just
leave the whole cart, if you dont mind, and the man shrugs and leaves. Kendrick walks to
the door and turns a knob and the lights dim to twilight. I can barely see Henry standing next
to the cage. Kendrick walks to him and silently removes the cloth.
The smell of cedar wafts from the cage. I stand and stare into it. I dont see anything but
the core of a roll of toilet paper, some food bowls, a water bottle, an exercise wheel, fluffy
cedar chips. Kendrick opens the top of the cage and reaches in, scoops out something small
and white. Henry and I crowd around, staring at the tiny mouse that sits blinking on
Kendricks palm. Kendrick takes a tiny penlight out of his pocket, turns it on and rapidly
flashes it over the mouse. The mouse tenses, and then it is gone.
Wow, I say. Kendrick places the cloth back over the cage and turns the lights up.
Its being published in next weeks issue of Nature, he says, smiling. Its the lead
article.
Congratulations, Henry says. He glances at the clock. How long are they usually gone?
And where do they go?
Kendrick gestures at the urn and we both nod. They tend to be gone about ten minutes or
so, he says, pouring three cups of coffee as he speaks and handing us each one. They go to
the Animal Lab in the basement, where they were born. They dont seem to be able to go
more than a few minutes either way.
Henry nods. Theyll go longer as they get older.
Yes, thats been true so far.
How did you do it? I ask Kendrick. I still cant quite believe that he has done it.
Kendrick blows on his coffee and takes a sip, makes a face. The coffee is bitter, and I add
sugar to mine. Well, he says, it helped a lot that Celera has been sequencing the whole
mouse genome. It told us where to look for the four genes we were targeting. But we could
have done it without that.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
256
We started by cloning your genes and then used enzymes to snip out the damaged
portions of DNA. Then we took those pieces and snuck them into mouse embryos at the
four-cell-division stage. That was the easy part.
Henry raises his eyebrows. Sure, of course. Clare and I do that all the time in our
kitchen. So what was the hard part? He sits on the table and sets his coffee beside him. In
the cage I can hear the squeaking of the exercise wheel.
Kendrick glances at me. The hard part was getting the dams, the mother mice, to carry
the altered mice to term. They kept dying, hemorrhaging to death.
Henry looks very alarmed. The mothers died?
Kendricks nods. The mothers died, and the babies died. We couldnt figure it out, so we
started watching them around the clock, and then we saw what was going on. The embryos
were traveling out of their dams womb, and then in again, and the mothers bled to death
internally. Or they would just abort the fetus at the ten-day mark. It was very frustrating.
Henry and I exchange looks and then look away. We can relate to that, I tell Kendrick.
Ye-ess, he says. But we solved the problem.
How? Henry asks.
We decided that it might be an immune reaction. Something about the fetal mice was so
foreign that the dams immune systems were trying to fight them as though they were a virus
or something. So we suppressed the dams immune systems, and then it all worked like
magic.
My heart is beating in my ears. Like magic.
Kendrick suddenly stoops and grabs for something on the floor. Gotcha, he says,
displaying the mouse in his cupped hands.
Bravo! Henry says. Whats next?
Gene therapy, Kendrick tells him. Drugs. He shrugs. Even though we can make it
happen, we still dont know why it happens. Or how it happens. So we try to understand
that. He offers Henry the mouse. Henry cups his hands and Kendrick tips the mouse into
them. Henry inspects it curiously.
It has a tattoo, he says.
Its the only way we can keep track of them, Kendrick tells him. They drive the
Animal Lab technicians nuts, theyre always escaping.
Henry laughs. Thats our Darwinian advantage, he says. We escape. He strokes the
mouse, and it shits on his palm.
Zero tolerance for stress, says Kendrick, and puts the mouse back in its cage, where it
flees into the toilet-paper core.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
257
As soon as we get home I am on the phone to Dr. Montague, babbling about immunosuppressants
and internal bleeding. She listens carefully and then tells me to come in next
week, and in the meantime she will do some research. I put down the phone and Henry
regards me nervously over the Times business section. Its worth a try, I tell him.
Lots of dead mouse moms before they figured it out, Henry says.
But it worked! Kendrick made it work!
Henry just says, Yeah  and goes back to reading. I open my mouth and then change my
mind and walk out to the studio, too excited to argue. It worked like magic. Like magic.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
258
FIVE
Thursday, May 11, 2000 (Henry is 39, Clare is 28)
HENRY: Im walking down Clark Street in late spring, 2000. Theres nothing too remarkable
about this. Its a lovely warm evening in Andersonville, and all the fashionable youth are
sitting at little tables drinking fancy cold coffee at Kopis, or sitting at medium-sized tables
eating couscous at Rezas, or just strolling, ignoring the Swedish knickknacks stores and
exclaiming over each others dogs. I should be at work, in 2002, but oh, well. Matt will have
to cover for my afternoon Show and Tell, I guess. I make a mental note to take him out to
dinner.
As I idle along, I unexpectedly see Clare across the street. She is standing in front of
Georges, the vintage clothing store, looking at a display of baby clothes. Even her back is
wistful, even her shoulders sigh with longing. As I watch her, she leans her forehead against
the shop window and stands there, dejected. I cross the street, dodging a UPS van and a
Volvo, and stand behind her. Clare looks up, startled, and sees my reflection in the glass.
Oh, its you, she says, and turns. I thought you were at the movies with Gomez. Clare
seems a little defensive, a little guilty, as though I have caught her doing something illicit.
I probably am. Im supposed to be at work, actually. In 2002.
Clare smiles. She looks tired, and I do the dates in my head and realize that our fifth
miscarriage was three weeks ago. I hesitate, and then I put my arms around her, and to my
relief she relaxes against me, leans her head on my shoulder.
How are you? I ask.
Terrible, she says softly. Tired. I remember. She stayed in bed for weeks. Henry, I
quit. She watches me, trying to gauge my reaction to this, weighing her intention against my
knowledge. I give up. It isnt going to happen.
Is there anything to stop me from giving her what she needs? I cant think of a single
reason not to tell her. I stand and rack my brain for anything that would preclude Clare
knowing. All I remember is her certainty, which I am about to create.
Persevere, Clare.
What?
Hang in there. In my present we have a baby.
Clare closes her eyes, whispers, Thank you. I dont know if shes talking to me or to
God. It doesnt matter. Thank you, she says, again, looking at me, talking to me, and I feel
as though I am an angel in some demented version of the Annunciation. I lean over and kiss
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
259
her; I can feel resolve, joy, purpose coursing through Clare. I remember the tiny head full of
black hair crowning between Clares legs and I marvel at how this moment creates that
miracle, and vice versa. Thank you. Thank you.
Did you know? Clare asks me.
No. She looks disappointed. Not only did I not know, I did everything I could think of
to prevent you from getting pregnant again.
Great. Clare laughs. So whatever happens, I just have to be quiet and let it rip?
Yep.
Clare grins at me, and I grin back. Let it rip.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
260
SIX
Saturday, June 3, 2000 (Clare is 29, Henry is 36)
CLARE: Im sitting at the kitchen table idly flipping through the Chicago Tribune and
watching Henry unpack the groceries. The brown paper bags stand evenly lined up on the
counter and Henry produces ketchup, chicken, gouda cheese from them like a magician. I
keep waiting for the rabbit and the silk scarves. Instead its mushrooms, black beans,
fettucine, lettuce, a pineapple, skim milk, coffee, radishes, turnips, a rutabaga, oatmeal,
butter, cottage cheese, rye bread, mayonnaise, eggs, razors, deodorant, Granny Smith apples,
half-and-half, bagels, shrimp, cream cheese, Frosted MiniWheats, marinara sauce, frozen
orange juice, carrots, condoms, sweet potatoes...condoms? I get up and walk to the counter,
pick up the blue box and shake it at Henry. What, are you having an affair?
He looks up at me defiantly as he rummages in the freezer. No, actually, I had an
epiphany. I was standing in the toothpaste aisle when it happened. Want to hear it?
No.
Henry stands up and turns to me. His expression is like a sigh. Well here it is anyway:
we cant keep trying to have a baby.
Traitor. We agreed..
...to keep trying. I think five miscarriages is enough. I think we have tried.
No. I meanwhy not, try again? I try to keep the pleading out of my voice, to keep the
anger that rises up in my throat from spilling into my words.
Henry walks around the counter, stands in front of me, but doesnt touch me, knows that
he cant touch me. Clare. The next time you miscarry its going to kill you, and I am not
going to keep doing something thats going to end up with you dead. Five pregnancies.. .I
know you want to try again, but I cant. I cant take it anymore, Clare. Im sorry.
I walk out the back door and stand in the sun, by the raspberry bushes. Our children, dead
and wrapped in silky gampi tissue paper, cradled in tiny wooden boxes, are in shade now, in
the late afternoon, by the roses. I feel the heat of the sun on my skin and shiver for them,
deep in the garden, cool on this mild June day. Help, I say in my head, to our future child. He
doesnt know, so I cant tell him. Come soon.
Friday, June 9, 2000/November 19, 1986 (Henry is 36, Clare is 15)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
261
HENRY: Its 8:45 a.m. on a Friday morning and Im sitting in the waiting room of a certain
Dr. Robert Gonsalez. Clare doesnt know Im here. Ive decided to get a vasectomy.
Dr. Gonsalezs office is on Sheridan Road, near Diversey, in a posh medical center just up
the way from the Lincoln Park Conservatory. This waiting room is decorated in browns and
hunter green, lots of paneling and framed prints of Derby winners from the 1880s. Very
manly. I feel as though I should be wearing a smoking jacket and clenching a large cigar
between my jaws. I need a drink.
The nice woman at Planned Parenthood assured me in her soothing, practiced voice that
this would hardly hurt a bit. There are five other guys sitting here with me. I wonder if
theyve got the clap, or maybe their prostates are acting up. Maybe some of them are like me,
sitting here waiting to end their careers as potential dads. I feel a certain solidarity with these
unknown men, all of us sitting here together in this brown wooden leather room on this gray
morning waiting to walk into the examining room and take off our pants. Theres a very old
man who sits leaning forward with his hands clasped around his cane, his eyes closed behind
thick glasses that magnify his eyelids. Hes probably not here to get snipped. The teenage
boy who sits leafing through an ancient copy of Esquire is feigning indifference. I close my
eyes and imagine that I am in a bar and the bartender has her back to me now as she mixes a
good single-malt Scotch with just a small amount of tepid water. Perhaps its an English pub.
Yes, that would account for the decor. The man on my left coughs, a deep lung-shaking sort
of cough, and when I open my eyes Im still sitting in a doctors waiting room. I sneak a look
at the watch of the guy on my right. Hes got one of those immense sports watches that you
can use to time sprints or call the mothership. Its 9:58. My appointment is in two minutes.
The doctor seems to be running late, though. The receptionist calls, Mr. Liston, and the
teenager stands up abruptly and walks through the heavy paneled door into the office. The
rest of us look at each other, furtively, as though we are on the subway and someone is trying
to sell us Streetwise.
I am rigid with tension and I remind myself that this is a necessary and good thing that I
am about to do. I am not a traitor. I am not a traitor. I am saving Clare from horror and pain.
She will never know. It will not hurt. Maybe it will hurt a little. Someday I will tell her and
she will realize I had to do it. We tried. I have no choice. I am not a traitor. Even if I hurts it
will be worth it. I am doing it because I love her. I think of Clare sitting on our bed, covered
in blood, weeping, and I feel sick.
Mr. DeTamble. I rise, and now I really feel sick. My knees buckle. My head swims, and
Im bent over, retching, Im on my hands and knees, the ground is cold and covered with the
stubble of dead grass. Theres nothing in my stomach, Im spitting up mucous. Its cold. I
look up. Im in the clearing, in the Meadow. The trees are bare, the sky is flat clouds with
early darkness approaching. Im alone.
I get up and find the clothes box. Soon I am wearing a Gang of Four T-shirt and a sweater
and jeans, heavy socks and black military boots, a black wool overcoat and large baby blue
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
262
mittens. Something has chewed its way into the box and made a nest. The clothes indicate
the mid-eighties. Clare is about fifteen or sixteen. I wonder whether to hang around and wait
for her or just go. I dont know if I can face Clares youthful exuberance right now. I turn
and walk toward the orchard.
It looks like late November. The Meadow is brown, and makes a rattling noise in the
wind. Crows are fighting over windfall apples at the edge of the orchard. Just as I reach them
I hear someone panting, running behind me. I turn, and its Clare.
Henry shes out of breath, she sounds like she has a cold. I let her stand, rasping, for
a minute. I cant talk to her. She stands, breathing, her breath steaming in front of her in
white clouds, her hair vivid red in the gray and brown, her skin pink and pale.
I turn and walk into the orchard.
Henry Clare follows me, catches my arm. What? What did I do? Why wont you
talk to me?
Oh God. I tried to do something for you, something important, and it didnt work. I got
nervous, and ended up here.
What was it?
I cant tell you. I wasnt even going to tell you about it in the present. You wouldnt like
it.
Then why did you want to do it? Clare shivers in the wind. It was the only way. I
couldnt get you to listen to me. I thought we could stop fighting if I did it. I sigh. I will try
again, and, if necessary, again.
Why are we fighting? Clare is looking up at me, tense and anxious.
Her nose is running.
Have you got a cold?
Yes. What are we fighting about?
It all began when the wife of your ambassador slapped the mistress of my prime minister
at a soiree being held at the embassy. This affected the tariff on oatmeal, which led to high
unemployment and rioting
Henry.
Yes?
Just once, just once, would you stop making fun of me and tell me something I am
asking you?
I cant.
Without apparent premeditation, Clare slaps me, hard. I step back, surprised, glad.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
263
Hit me again.
She is confused, shakes her head. Please, Clare.
No. Why do you want me to hit you? I wanted to hurt you.
I want you to hurt me. Please. I hang my head.
What is the matter with you?
Everything is terrible and I cant seem to feel it.
 What is terrible? What is going on?
Dont ask me. Clare comes up, very close to me, and takes my hand, one pulls off the
ridiculous blue mitten, brings my palm to her mouth, and bites. The pain is excruciating. She
stops, and I look at my hand, Blood comes slowly, in tiny drops, around the bite mark. I will
probably get blood poisoning, but at the moment I dont care.
Tell me. Her face is inches from mine. I kiss her, very roughly. She is resistant. I
release her, and she turns her back on me.
That wasnt very nice, she says in a small voice.
What is wrong with me? Clare, at fifteen, is not the same person whos been torturing me
for months, refusing to give up on having a baby, risking death and despair, turning
lovemaking into a battlefield strewn with the corpses of children. I put my hands on her
shoulders. Im sorry. Im very sorry, Clare, its not you. Please.
She turns. Shes crying, and shes a mess. Miraculously, theres a Kleenex in my coat
pocket. I dab at her face, and she takes the tissue from me and blows her nose.
You never kissed me before. Oh, no. My face must be funny, because Clare laughs. I
cant believe it. What an idiot I am.
Oh, Clare, Justforget that, okay? Just erase it. It never happened. Come here. Take
two, yes? Clare?
She tentatively steps toward me. I put my arms around her, look at her. Her eyes are
rimmed red, her nose is swollen, and she definitely has a bad cold. I place my hands over her
ears and tip her head back, and kiss her, and try to put my heart into hers, for safekeeping, in
case I lose it again.
Friday, June 9, 2000 (Clare is 29, Henry is 36)
CLARE: Henry has been terribly quiet, distracted, and pensive all evening. All through dinner
he seemed to be mentally searching imaginary stacks for a book hed read in 1942 or
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
264
something. Plus his right hand is all bandaged up. After dinner he went into the bedroom and
lay face down on the bed with his head hanging over the foot of the bed and his feet on my
pillow. I went to the studio and scrubbed molds and deckles and drank my coffee, but I
wasnt enjoying myself because I couldnt figure out what Henrys problem was. Finally I go
back into the house. He is still lying in the same position. In the dark.
I lie down on the floor. My back makes loud cracking sounds as I stretch out.
Clare?
Mmmm?
Do you remember the first time I kissed you?
Vividly.
Im sorry. Henry rolls over.
Im burning up with curiosity. What were you so upset about? You were trying to do
something, and it didnt work, and you said I wouldnt like it. What was it?
How do you manage to remember all that?
I am the original elephant child. Are you going to tell me now?
No.
If I guess will you tell me if Im right?
Probably not.
Why not?
Because I am exhausted, and I dont want to fight tonight.
I dont want to fight either. I like lying here on the floor. Its kind of cold but very solid.
You went to get a vasectomy.
Henry is silent. He is so silent for so long that I want to put a mirror in front of his mouth
to see if hes breathing. Finally: How did you know?
I didnt exactly know. I was afraid that might be it. And I saw the note you made for the
appointment with the doctor this morning.
I burned that note.
I saw the impression on the sheet below the one you wrote on.
Henry groans. Okay, Sherlock. You got me. We continue to lie peaceably in the dark.
Go ahead.
What?
Get a vasectomy. If you have to.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
265
Henry rolls over again and looks at me. All I see is his dark head against the dark ceiling.
Youre not yelling at me.
No. I cant do this anymore, either. I give up. You win, well stop trying to have a baby.
I wouldnt exactly describe that as winning. It just seemsnecessary.
Whatever.
Henry climbs off the bed and sits on the floor with me. Thank you.
Youre welcome. He kisses me. I imagine the bleak November day in 1986 that Henry
has just come from, the wind, the warmth of his body in the cold orchard. Soon, for the first
time in many months, we are making love without worrying about the consequences. Henry
has caught the cold I had sixteen years ago. Four weeks later, Henry has had his vasectomy
and I discover that I am pregnant for the sixth time.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
266
BABY DREAMS
September, 2000 (Clare is 29)
CLARE: I dream Im walking down stairs into my grandmother Abshires basement. The long
soot mark from the time the crow flew down the chimney is still there on the left-hand wall;
the steps are dusty and the handrail leaves gray marks on my hand as I steady myself; I
descend and walk into the room that always scared me when I was little. In this room are
deep shelves with rows and rows of canned goods, tomatoes and pickles, corn relish and
beets. They look embalmed. In one of the jars is the small fetus of a duck. I carefully open
the jar and pour the ducking and the fluid into my hand. It gasps and retches. Why did you
leave me? it asks, when it can speak. Ive been waiting for you.
I dream that my mother and I are walking together down a quiet residential street in South
Haven. I am carrying a baby. As we walk, the baby becomes heavier and heavier, until I can
barely lift it. I turn to Mama and tell her that I cant carry this baby any farther; she takes it
from me easily and we continue on. We come to a house and walk down the small walkway
to its backyard. In the yard there are two screens and a slide projector. People are seated in
lawn chairs, watching slides of trees. Half of a tree is on each screen. One half is summer and
the other winter; they are the same tree, different seasons. The baby laughs and cries out in
delight, I dream I am standing on the Sedgewick El platform, waiting for the Brown Line
train. I am carrying two shopping bags, which upon inspection turn out to contain boxes of
saltine crackers and a very small, stillborn baby with red hair, wrapped in Saran Wrap.
I dream I am at home, in my old room. Its late at night, the room is dimly illuminated by
the aquarium light. I suddenly realize, with horror, that there is a small animal swimming
round and round the tank; I hastily remove the lid and net the animal, which turns out to be a
gerbil with gills. Im so sorry I say. I forgot about you. The gerbil just stares at me
reproachfully.
I dream I am walking up stairs in Meadowlark House. All the furniture is gone, the rooms
are empty, dust floats in the sunlight which makes golden pools on the polished oak floors. I
walk down the long hall, glancing in the bedrooms, and come to my room, in which a small
wooden cradle sits alone. There is no sound. I am afraid to look into the cradle. In Mamas
room white sheets are spread over the floor. At my feet is a tiny drop of blood, which touches
the tip of a sheet and spreads as I watch until the entire floor is covered in blood.
Saturday, September 23, 2000 (Clare is 29, Henry is 37)
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
267
CLARE: Im living under water. Everything seems slow and far away. I know theres a world
up there, a sunlit quick world where time runs like dry sand through an hourglass, but down
here, where I am, air and sound and time and feeling are thick and dense. Im in a diving bell
with this baby, just the two of us trying to survive in this alien atmosphere, but I feel very
alone. Hello? Are you there? No answer comes back. Hes dead, I tell Amit. No, she says,
smiling anxiously, no, Clare, see, theres his heartbeat. T cant explain. Henry hovers
around trying to feed me, massage me, cheer me up, until I snap at him. I walk across the
yard, into my studio. Its like a museum, a mausoleum, so still, nothing living or breathing,
no ideas here, just things, things that stare at me accusingly. Im sorry, I tell my blank, empty
drawing table, my dry vats and molds, the half-made sculptures. Stillborn, I think, looking at
the blue iris paper-wrapped armature that seemed so hopeful in June. My hands are clean and
soft and pink. I hate them. I hate this emptiness. I hate this baby. No. No, I dont hate him. I
just cant find him.
I sit at my drawing board with a pencil in my hand and a sheet of white paper before me.
Nothing comes. I close my eyes and all I can think of is red. So I get a tube of watercolor,
cadmium red dark, and I get a big mop of a brush, and I fill a jar with water, and I begin to
cover the paper with red. It glistens. The paper is limp with moisture, and darkens as it dries.
I watch it drying. It smells of gum arabic. In the center of the paper, very small, in black ink,
I draw a heart, not a silly Valentine but an anatomically correct heart, tiny, doll-like, and then
veins, delicate road maps of veins, that reach all the way to the edges of the paper, that hold
the small heart enmeshed like a fly in a spiderweb. See, theres his heartbeat.
It has become evening. I empty the water jar and wash the brush. I lock the studio door,
cross the yard, and let myself in the back door. Henry is making spaghetti sauce. He looks up
as I come in.
Better? he asks.
Better, I reassure him, and myself.
Wednesday, September 27, 2000 (Clare is 29)
CLARE: Its lying on the bed. Theres some blood, but not so much. Its lying on its back,
trying to breathe, its tiny ribcage quivering, but its too soon, its convulsing, and blood is
gushing from the cord in time with the beating of its heart. I kneel beside the bed and pick it
up, pick him up, my tiny boy, jerking like a small freshly caught fish, drowning in air. I hold
him, so gently, but he doesnt know Im here, holding him, he is slippery and his skin is
almost imaginary, his eyes are closed and I think wildly of mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, of
911 and Henry, oh, don t go before Henry can see you! but his breath is bubbling with fluid,
small sea creature breathing water and then he opens his mouth wide and I can see right
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
268
through him and my hands are empty and hes gone, gone.
I dont know how long, time passes. I am kneeling. Kneeling, I pray. Dear God. Dear
God. Dear God. The baby stirs in my womb. Hush. Hide.
I wake up in the hospital. Henry is there. The baby is dead.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
269
SEVEN
Thursday, December 28, 2000 (Henry is 33, and 37, Clare is 29)
HENRY: I am standing in our bedroom, in the future. Its night, but moonlight gives the room
a surreal, monochromatic distinctness. My ears are ringing, as they often do, in the future. I
look down on Clare and myself, sleeping. It feels like death. I am sleeping tightly balled up,
knees to chest, wound up in blankets, mouth slightly open. I want to touch me. I want to hold
me in my arms, look into my eyes. But it wont happen that way; I stand for long minutes
staring intently at my sleeping future self. Eventually I walk softly to Clares side of the bed,
kneel. It feels immensely like the present. I will myself to forget the other body in the bed, to
concentrate on Clare.
She stirs, her eyes open. She isnt sure where we are. Neither am I.
I am overwhelmed by desire, by a longing to be connected to Clare as strongly as
possible, to be here, now. I kiss her very lightly, lingering, linking about nothing. She is
drunk with sleep, moves her hand to my face and wakes more as she feels the solidity of me.
Now she is present; she runs her hand down my arm, a caress. I carefully peel the sheet from
her, so as not to disturb the other me, of whom Clare is still not aware. I wonder if this other
self is somehow impervious to waking, but decide not to find out. I am lying on top of Clare,
covering her completely with my body. I wish I could stop her from turning her head, but she
will turn her head any minute now. As I penetrate Clare she looks at me and I think I dont
exist and a second later she turns her head and sees me. She cries out, not loudly, and looks
back at me, above her, in her. Then she remembers, accepts it, this is pretty strange but its
okay, and in this moment I love her more than life.
Monday, February 12, 2001 (Henry is 37, Clare is 29)
HENRY: Clare has been in a strange mood all week. Shes distracted. It is as though
something only Clare can hear has riveted her attention, as though shes receiving revelations
from God through her fillings, or trying to decode satellite transmissions of Russian
cryptology in her head. When I ask her about it, she just smiles and shrugs. This is so unlike
Clare that I am alarmed, and immediately desist.
I come home from work one evening and I can see just by looking at Clare that something
awful has happened. Her expression is scared and pleading. She comes close to me and stops,
and doesnt say anything. Someone has died, I think. Who has died? Dad? Kimy? Philip?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
270
Say something, I ask. Whats happened?
Im pregnant.
How can you Even as I say it I know exactly how. Never mind, I remember. For
me, that night was years ago, but for Clare it is only weeks in the past. I was coming from
1996, when we were trying desperately to conceive, and Clare was barely awake. I curse
myself for a careless fool. Clare is waiting for me to say something. I force myself to smile.
Big surprise.
Yeah. She looks a little teary. I take her into my arms, and she holds me tightly.
Scared? I murmur into Clares hair.
Uh-huh.
You were never scared, before.
I was crazy, before. Now I know....
What it is.
What can happen. We stand and think about what can happen.
I hesitate. We could.... I let it hang.
No. I cant. Its true. Clare cant. Once a Catholic, always a Catholic.
I say, Maybe it will be good. A happy accident.
Clare smiles, and I realize that she wants this, that she actually hopes that seven will be
our lucky number. My throat contracts, and I have to turn away.
Tuesday, February 20, 2001 (Clare is 29, Henry is 37)
CLARE: The clock radio clicks on at 7:46 a.m. and National Public Radio sadly tells me that
there has been a plane crash somewhere and eighty-six people are dead. Im pretty sure I am
one of them. Henrys side of the bed is empty. I close my eyes and I am in a little berth in a
cabin on an ocean-liner, pitching over rough seas. I sigh and gingerly creep out of bed and
into the bathroom. Im still throwing up ten minutes later when Henry sticks his head in the
door and asks me if Im okay. Great. Never better.
He perches on the edge of the tub. I would just as soon not have an audience for this.
Should I be worried? You never threw up at all before.
Amit says this is good; Im supposed to throw up. Its something about my body
recognizing the baby as part of me, instead of a foreign body. Amit has been giving me this
drug they give people who have organ transplants.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
271
Maybe I should bank some more blood for you today. Henry and I are both type O. I
nod, and throw up. We are avid blood bankers; he has needed transfusions twice, and I have
had three, one of them requiring a huge amount. I sit for a minute and then stagger to my
feet. Henry steadies me. I wipe my mouth and brush my teeth. Henry goes downstairs to
make breakfast. I suddenly have an overpowering desire for oatmeal.
Oatmeal! I yell down the stairs.
Okay!
I begin to brush out my hair. My reflection in the mirror shows me pink and puffy. I
thought pregnant women were supposed to glow. I am not glowing. Oh, well. Im still
pregnant, and thats all that counts.
Thursday, April 19, 2001 (Henry is 37, Clare is 29)
HENRY: We are at Amit Montagues office for the ultrasound. Clare and I have been both
eager and reluctant to have an ultrasound. We have refused amniocentesis because we are
sure we will lose the baby if we poke a huge long needle at it. Clare is eighteen weeks
pregnant. Halfway there; if we could fold time in half right now like a Rorschach test, this
would be the crease down the middle. We live in a state of holding breath, afraid to exhale
for fear of breathing out the baby too soon.
We sit in the waiting room with other expectant couples and mothers with strollers and
toddlers who run around bumping into things. Dr. Montagues office always depresses me,
because we have spent so much time here being anxious and hearing bad news. But today is
different. Today everything will be okay.
A nurse calls our names. We repair to an examining room. Clare gets undressed, and gets
on the table, and is greased and scanned. The technician watches the monitor. Amit
Montague, who is tall and regal and French Moroccan, watches the monitor. Clare and I hold
hands. We watch
the monitor, too. Slowly the image builds itself, bit by bit.
On the screen is a weather map of the world. Or a galaxy, a swirl of stars. Or a baby.
 Bien joue, une fille, Dr. Montague says. She is sucking her thumb. She is very pretty.
And very big.
Clare and I exhale. On the screen a pretty galaxy is sucking her thumb. As we watch she
takes her hand away from her mouth. Dr. Montague says, She smiles. And so do we.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
272
Monday, August 20, 2001 (Clare is 30, Henry is 38)
CLARE: The baby is due in two weeks and we still havent settled on a name for her. In fact,
weve barely discussed it; weve been avoiding the whole subject superstitiously, as though
naming the baby will cause the Furies to notice her and torment her. Finally Henry brings
home a book called Dictionary of Given Names.
We are in bed. Its only 8:30 p.m. and Im wiped out. I lie on my side, my belly a
peninsula, facing Henry, who lies on his side facing me with his head propped on his arm,
the book on the bed between us. We look at each other, smile nervously.
Any thoughts? he says, leafing through the book.
Jane, I reply.
He makes a face. Jane?
I used to name all my dolls and stuffed animals Jane. Every one of them.
Henry looks it up. It means  Gift of God.
That works for me.
Lets have something a little unusual. How about Irette? Or Jodotha? He s through the
pages. Heres a good one: Loololuluah. Its Arabic for pearl.
How about Pearl? I picture the baby as a smooth iridescent white ball.
Henry runs his finger downs the columns. Okay:  (Latin) A probable variant of perula,
in reference to the most valued form of this product of disease.
Ugh. Whats wrong with this book? I take it from Henry and, for kicks, look up 
Henry (Teutonic) Ruler of the home: chief of the dwelling.
He laughs. Look up Clare.
Its just another form of  Clara (Latin) Illustrious, bright.
Thats good, he says.
I flip through the book randomly. Philomele?
I like that, says Henry. But what of the horrible nickname issue? Philly? Mel?
Pyrene (Greek) Red-haired.
But what if she isnt? Henry reaches over the book and picks up a handful of my hair,
and puts the ends in his mouth. I pull it away from him and push all my hair behind me.
I thought we knew everything there was to know about this kid. Surely Kendrick tested
for red hair? I say.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
273
Henry retrieves the book from me. Yseult? Zoe? I like Zoe. Zoe has possibilities.
Whats it mean?
Life.
Yeah, thats very good. Bookmark that.
Eliza, Henry offers.
Elizabeth.
Henry looks at me, hesitates. Annette.
Lucy.
No  Henry says firmly.
No, I agree.
What we need Henry says, is a fresh start. A blank slate. Lets call her Tabula Rasa.
Lets call her Titanium White.
Blanche, Blanca, Bianca...
Alba, I say.
 As in Duchess of?
Alba DeTamble. It rolls around in my mouth as I say it.
Thats nice, all the little iambs, tripping along... Hes flipping through the book.  Alba
(Latin) White. (Provencal) Dawn of day. Hmm. He laboriously clambers off the bed. I can
hear him rummaging around in the living room; he returns after a few minutes with Volume I
of the OED, the big Random House dictionary, and my decrepit old Encyclopedia Americana
Book I, A to Annuals. A dawn song of the Provencal poets.. .in honor of their mistresses.
Reveilles, a Vaurore, par le cri du guet-teur, deux amants qui viennent de passer la nuit
ensemble se separent en maudissant le jour qui vient trop tat; tel est le theme, non moins
invariable que celui de la pastourelle, dun genre dontle nom est emprunte au mot alba, qui
figure parfois au debut de la piece. Et regulierement a la fin de chaque couplet, ou il forme
refrain. How sad. Lets try Random House. This is better. A white city on a hill. A
fortress. He jettisons Random House off the bed and opens the encyclopedia. AEsop, Age
of Reason, Alaska...okay, here, Alba. He scans the entry. A bunch of now wiped-out towns
in ancient Italy. And the Duke of Alba.
I sigh and turn onto my back. The baby stirs. She must have been sleeping. Henry is back
to perusing the bed. Amour. Amourous. Armadillo. Bazooms. Goodness, the things they
print these days in works reference. He slides his hand under my nightgown, runs it slowly
over her taut stomach. The baby kicks, hard, just where his hand is, and he arts, and looks at
me, amazed. His hands are roaming, finding their way toss familiar and unfamiliar terrain.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
274
How many DeTambles can you fit in there?
Uh, theres always room for one more.
Alba, he says, softly.
A white city. An impregnable fortress on a white hill.
Shell like it. Henry is pulling my underwear down my legs and over my ankles. He
tosses it off the bed and looks at me.
Careful..., I tell him.
Very careful, he agrees, as he strips off his clothes.
I feel immense, like a continent in a sea of pillows and blankets. Henry bends over me
from behind, moves over me, an explorer mapping my skin with his tongue. Slowly,
slowly.... I am afraid.
A song sung by the troubadours at dawn... he is whispering to me as he enters me.
...To their mistresses, I reply. My eyes are closed and I hear Henry as though from the
next room:
Just.. .so. And then: Yes. Yes!
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
275
ALBA, AN INTRODUCTION
Wednesday, November 16, 2011 (Henry is 38, Clare is 40)
HENRY: Im in the Surrealist Galleries at the Art Institute of Chicago, in the future. I am not
perfectly dressed; the best I could do was a long black winter coat from the coat check room
and pants from a guards locker. I did manage to find shoes, which are always the most
difficult thing to get. So I figure Ill lift a wallet, buy a T-shirt in the museum store, have
lunch, see some art, and then launch myself out of the building and into the world of shops
and hotel rooms. I have no idea where I am in time. Not too far out there; the clothing and
haircuts are not too different from 2001. Im simultaneously excited about this little sojourn
and disturbed, because in my present Clare is about to have Alba at any moment, and I
absolutely want to be there, but on the other hand this is an unusually high-quality slice of
forward time travel. I feel strong and really present, really good. So I stand quietly in a dark
room full of spot-lit Joseph Cornell boxes, watching a school group following a docent,
carrying little stools which they obediently sit on when she tells them to park themselves.
I observe the group. The docent is the usual: a well-groomed woman in her fifties with
impossibly blond hair and taut face. The teacher, a good-humored young woman wearing
light blue lipstick, stands at the back of the flock of students, ready to contain any who get
boisterous. Its the students who interest me. They are all about ten or so, fifth grade, I guess
that would be. Its a Catholic school, so they all wear identical clothes, green plaid for the
girls and navy blue for the boys. They are attentive and polite, but not excited. Too bad; I
would think Cornell would be perfect for kids. The docent seems to think they are younger
than they are; she talks to them as though they are little children. Theres a girl in the back
row who seems more engaged than the rest. I cant see her face. She has long curly black hair
and a peacock-blue dress, which sets her apart from her peers. Every time the docent asks a
question, this girls hand goes up, but the docent never calls on her. I can see that the girl is
getting fed up.
The docent is talking about Cornells Aviary boxes. Each box is bleak, and many have
white, painted interiors with perches and the kind of holes that a birdhouse would have, and
some have pictures of birds. They are the starkest and most austere of his pieces, without the
whimsy of the Soap Bubble Sets or the romance of the Hotel boxes.
Why do you think Mr. Cornell made these boxes? The docent brightly scans the
children for a reply, ignoring the peacock-blue girl, who is waving her hand like she has
Saint Vitus Dance. A boy in the front says shyly that the artist must have liked birds. This is
too much for the girl She stands up with her hand in the air. The docent reluctantly says,
Yes?
He made the boxes because he was lonely. He didnt have anyone to love, and he made
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
276
the boxes so he could love them, and so people would know that he existed, and because
birds are free and the boxes are hiding places for the birds so they will feel safe, and he
wanted to be free and be safe. The boxes are for him so he can be a bird. The girl sits down.
I am blown away by her answer. This is a ten-year-old who can empathize with Joseph
Cornell. Neither the docent nor the class exactly knows what to make of this, but the teacher,
who is obviously used to her, says, Thank you, Alba, thats very perceptive. She turns and
smiles gratefully at the teacher, and I see her face, and I am looking at my daughter. I have
been standing in the next gallery, and I take a few steps forward, to look at her, to see her,
and she sees me, and her face lights up, and she jumps up, knocks over her little folding
chair, and almost before I know it I am holding Alba in my arms, holding her tight, kneeling
before her with my arms around her as she says Daddy over and over.
Everyone is gaping at us. The teacher hurries over.
She says, Alba, who is this? Sir, who are you?
Im Henry DeTamble, Albas father.
Hes my daddy!
The teacher is almost wringing her hands. Sir, Albas father is dead.
I am speechless. But Alba, daughter mine, has a grip on the situation.
Hes dead, she tells her teacher. But hes not continuously dead.
I find my wits. Its kind of hard to explain
Hes a CDP, says Alba. Like me. This seems to make perfect sense to the teacher
although it means nothing to me. The teacher is a bit pale under her makeup but she looks
sympathetic. Alba squeezes my hand. Say something, is what she means.
Ah, Ms.
Cooper.
Ms. Cooper, is there any possibility that Alba and I could have a few minutes, here, to
talk? We dont see each other much.
Well...I just...were on a field trip...the group...I cant let you just take the child away
from the group, and I dont really know that you are Mr. DeTamble, you see....
Lets call Mama, says Alba. She runs over to her school bag and whips out a cell phone.
She presses a key and I hear the phone ringing and Im rapidly realizing that there are
possibilities here: someone picks up on the other end, and Alba says Mama?...Im at the Art
Institute...No, Im okay...Mama, Daddys here! Tell Mrs. Cooper its really Daddy, okay?...
Yeah, k, bye! She hands me the phone. I hesitate, pull my head together.
Clare? Theres a sharp intake of breath. Clare?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
277
 Henry! Oh, God, I cant believe it! Come home!
Ill try....
When are you from?
2001. Just before Alba was born. I smile at Alba. She is leaning against me, holding my
hand.
Maybe I should come down there?
That would be faster. Listen, could you tell this teacher that Im really me?
Surewhere will you be?
At the lions. Come as fast as you can, Clare. It wont be much longer.
I love you.
I love you, Clare. I hesitate, and then hand the phone to Mrs. Cooper. She and Clare
have a short conversation, in which Clare somehow convinces her to let me take Alba to the
museum entrance, where Clare will meet us. I thank Mrs. Cooper, who has been pretty
graceful in a weird situation, and Alba and I walk hand in hand out of the Morton Wing,
down the spiral staircase and into Chinese ceramics. My mind is racing-What to ask first?
Alba says, Thank you for the videos. Mama gave them to me for my birthday. What
videos? I can do the Yale and the Master, and Im working on the Walters.
Locks. Shes learning to pick locks. Great. Keep at it. Listen, Alba?
Daddy?
Whats a CDP?
Chrono-Displaced Person. We sit down on a bench in front of a Tang Dynasty porcelain
dragon. Alba sits facing me, with her hands in her lap. She looks exactly like me at ten. I can
hardly believe any of this. Alba isnt even born yet and here she is, Athena sprung full
blown. I level with her. You know, this is the first time Ive met you.
Alba smiles. How do you do? She is the most self-possessed child Ive ever met. I
scrutinize her: where is Clare in this child? Do we see each other much?
She considers. Not much. Its been about a year. I saw you a few times when I was
eight.
How old were you when I died? I hold my breath. Five. Jesus. I cant deal with this.
Im sorry! Should I not have said that? Alba is contrite. I hug her to me. Its okay. I
asked, didnt I? I take a deep breath. How is Clare?
Okay. Sad. This pierces me. I realize I dont want to know anything more.
What about you? Hows school? What are you learning?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
278
Alba grins. Im not learning much in school, but Im reading all about early instruments,
and Egypt, and Mama and I are reading Lord of the Rings, and Im learning a tango by Astor
Piazzolla.
At ten? Heavens. Violin? Whos your teacher?
Gramps. For a moment I think she means my grandfather, and then I realize she means
Dad. This is great. If Dad is spending time with Alba, she must actually be good.
Are you good? What a rude question.
Yes. Im very good.
Thank God. I was never any good at music.
Thats what Gramps says. She giggles. But you like music. I love music. I just cant
play it, myself. I heard Grandma Annette sing! She was so beautiful.
Which recording? I saw her for real. At the Lyric. She was singing Aida.
Hes a CDP, like me. Oh, shit. You time travel.
Sure. Alba smiles happily. Mama always says you and I are exactly alike. Dr.
Kendrick says I am a prodigy
How so?
Sometimes I can go when and where I want. Alba looks pleased with herself; Im so
envious.
Can you not go at all if you dont want to?
Well, no, She looks embarrassed. But I like it. I mean, sometimes its not convenient,
but...its interesting, you know? Yes. I know.
Come and visit me, if you can be anytime you want.
I tried. I saw you once on the street; you were with a blond woman. You seemed like you
maybe were busy, though. Alba blushes and all of a sudden Clare peeks out at me, for just a
tiny fraction of a second.
That was Ingrid. I dated her before I met your mom. I wonder what we were doing, Ing
and I, back then, that Alba is so discomfited by; I feel a pang of regret, that I made a poor
impression on this sober and lovely girl. Speaking of your mom, we should go out front and
wait for her. The high-pitched whining noise has set in, and I just hope Clare will get here
before Im gone. Alba and I get up and quickly make our way to the front steps. Its late fall,
and Alba doesnt have a coat, so I wrap mine around both of us. I am leaning against the
granite slab that supports one of the lions, facing south, and Alba leans against me, encased
in my coat, pressed against my bare torso with just her face sticking out at the level of my
chest. Its a rainy day. Traffic swims along on Michigan Avenue. I am drunk with the
overwhelming love I feel for this amazing child, who presses against me as though she
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
279
belongs to me, as though we will never be separated, as though we have all the time in the
world. I am clinging to this moment, fighting fatigue and the pulling of my own time. Let me
stay, I implore my body, God, Father Time, Santa, anybody who might be listening. Just let
me see Clare, and Ill come along peacefully.
Theres Mama , says Alba. A white car, unfamiliar to me, is speeding toward us. It pulls
up to the intersection and Clare jumps out, leaving it where it is, blocking traffic.
Henry! I try to run to her, she is running, and I collapse onto the steps, and I stretch out
my arms toward Clare: Alba is holding me and yelling something and Clare is only a few
feet from me and I use my last reserves of will to look at Clare who seems so far away and I
say as clearly as I can I love you, and Im gone. Damn. Damn.
7:20p.m. Friday, August 24, 2001 (Clare is 30, Henry is 38)
CLARE: I am lying on the battered chaise lounge in the backyard with books and magazines
cast adrift all around me and a half-drunk glass of lemonade now diluted with melted ice
cubes at my elbow. Its beginning to cool off a bit. It was eighty-five degrees earlier; now
theres a breeze and the cicadas are singing their late summer song. Fifteen jets have passed
over me on their way to OHare from distances unknown. My belly looms before me,
anchoring me to this spot. Henry has been gone since eight oclock yesterday morning and I
am beginning to be afraid. What if I go into labor and hes not here? What if I have the baby
and he still isnt back? What if hes hurt? What if hes dead? What if I die? These thoughts
chase each other like those weird fur pieces old ladies used to wear around their necks with
the tail in the mouth, circling around until I cant stand one more minute of it. Usually I like
to fret in a whirl of activity; I worry about Henry while I scrub down the studio or do nine
loads of wash or pull three posts of paper. But now I lie here, beached by my belly in the
early evening sun of our backyard while Henry is out there.. .doing what-ever it is that he is
doing. Oh, God. Bring him back. Now.
But nothing happens. Mr. Panetta drives down the alley and his garage door screeches
open and then closed. A Good Humor truck comes and goes. The fireflies begin their
evening revels. But no Henry.
I am getting hungry. I am going to starve to death in the backyard because Henry is not
here to make dinner. Alba is squirming around and I consider getting up and going into the
kitchen and fixing some food and eating it. But then I decide to do the same thing I always
do when Henry isnt around to feed me. I get up, slowly, in increments, and walk sedately
into the house. I find my purse, and I turn on a few lights, and I let myself out the front door
and lock it. It feels good to be moving. Once again I am surprised, and am surprised to be
surprised, that I am so huge in one part of my body only, like someone whose plastic surgery
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
280
has gone wrong, like one of those women in an African tribe whose idea of beauty requires
extremely elongated necks or lips or earlobes. I balance my weight against Albas, and in this
Siamese twin dancing manner we walk to the Opart Thai Restaurant.
The restaurant is cool and full of people. I am ushered to a table in the front window. I
order spring rolls and Pad Thai with tofu, bland and safe. I drink a whole glass of water. Alba
presses against my bladder; I go to the restroom and when I come back food is on the table. I
eat. I imagine the conversation Henry and I would be having if he were here. I wonder where
he might be. I mentally comb through my memory, trying to fit the Henry who vanished
while putting on his pants yesterday with any Henry I have seen in my childhood. This is a
waste of time; Ill just have to wait for the story from Himself. Maybe hes back. I have to
stop myself from bolting out of the restaurant to go check. The entree arrives. I squeeze lime
over the noodles and scoop them into my mouth. I picture Alba, tiny and pink, curled inside
me, eating Pad Thai with tiny delicate chopsticks. I picture her with long black hair and
green eyes. She smiles and says, Thanks, Mama. I smile and tell her, Youre welcome, so
very welcome. She has a tiny stuffed animal in there with her named Alfonzo. Alba gives
Alfonzo some tofu. I finish eating. I sit for a few minutes, resting.
Someone at the next table lights up a cigarette. I pay, and leave.
I toddle down Western Avenue. A car full of Puerto Rican teenagers yells something at
me, but I dont catch it. Back at the ranch I fumble for my keys and Henry swings the door
open and says, Thank God, and flings his arms around me.
We kiss. I am so relieved to see him that it takes me a few minutes to realize that he is
also extremely relieved to see me.
Where have you been? Henry demands.
Opart. Where have you been?
You didnt leave a note, and I came home, and you werent here, and I thought you were
at the hospital. So I called, but they said you werent
I start laughing, and its hard to stop. Henry looks perplexed. When I can say something I
tell him, Now you know how it feels.
He smiles. Sorry. But I justI didnt know where you were, and I sort of panicked. I
thought Id missed Alba.
But where were you?
Henry grins. Wait till you hear this. Just a minute. Lets sit down.
Lets lie down. Im beat.
Whadja do all day?
Laid around.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
281
Poor Clare, no wonder youre tired. I go into the bedroom and turn on the air
conditioner and pull the shades. Henry veers into the kitchen and appears after a few minutes
with drinks. I arrange myself on the bed and receive ginger ale; Henry kicks off his shoes and
joins me with a beer in hand.
Tell all.
Well. He raises one eyebrow and opens his mouth and closes it. I dont know how to
begin.
Spit it out.
I have to start by saying that this is by far the weirdest thing that has ever happened to
me.
Weirder than you and me?
Yeah. I mean, that felt reasonably natural, boy meets girl...
Weirder than watching your mom die over and over?
Well, thats just a horrible routine, by now. Its a bad dream I have every so often. No,
this was just surreal. He runs his hand over my belly. I went forward, and I was really
there, you know, coming in strong, and I ran into our little girl, here.
Oh, my god. Im so jealous. But wow.
Yeah. She was about ten. Clare, she is so amazingshes smart and musical and
just...really confident and nothing fazed her....
What does she look like?
Me. A girl version of me. I mean, shes beautiful, shes got your eyes, but basically she
looks a lot like me: black hair, pale, with a few freckles, and her mouth is smaller than mine
was, and her ears dont stick out. She had long curly hair, and my hands with the long
fingers, and shes tall.... She was like a young cat.
Perfect. Perfect.
Im afraid my genes have had their way with her.... She was like you in personality,
though. She had the most amazing presence...I saw her in a group of schoolchildren at the
Art Institute and she was talking about Joseph Cornells Aviary boxes, and she said
something heartrending about him.. .and somehow I knew who she was. And she recognized
me.
Well, I would hope so. I have to ask. Does sheis she?
Henry hesitates. Yes, he finally says. She does. We are both silent. He strokes my
face. I know.
I want to cry.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
282
Clare, she seemed happy. I asked hershe said she likes it. He smiles. She said it was
interesting!
We both laugh, a little ruefully at first, and then, it hits me, and we laugh in earnest, until
our faces hurt, until tears are streaming down our cheeks. Because, of course, it is interesting.
Very interesting.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
283
BIRTHDAY
Wednesday, September 5-Thursday September 6, 2001 (Henry is 38, Clare is 30)
HENRY: Clare has been pacing around the house all day like a tiger. The contractions come
every twenty minutes or so. Try to get some sleep, I tell her, and she lies on the bed for a
few minutes and then gets up again. At two in the morning she finally goes to sleep. I lie next
to her, wakeful, watching her breathe, listening to the little fretful sounds she makes, playing
with her hair. I am worried, even though I know, even though I have seen with my own eyes
that she will be okay, and Alba will be okay. Clare wakes up at 3:30.
I want to go to the hospital, she tells me.
Maybe we should call a cab, I say. Its awfully late.
Gomez said to call no matter what time it was.
Okay. I dial Gomez and Charisse. The phone rings sixteen times, and then Gomez picks
up, sounding like a man on the bottom of the sea.
Muh? says Gomez.
Hey, Comrade. Its time.
He mutters something that sounds like mustard eggs. Then Charisse sets on the phone
and tells me that they are on their way. I hang up and call Dr. Montague, and leave a message
with her answering service. Clare is crouched on all fours, rocking back and forth. I get down
on the floor with her.
Clare?
She looks up at me, still rocking. Henry...why did we decide to do this again?
Supposedly when its over they hand you a baby and let you keep it.
Oh, yeah.
Fifteen minutes later we are climbing into Gomezs Volvo. Gomez yawns as he helps me
maneuver Clare into the back seat. Do not even think of drenching my car in amniotic
fluid, he says to Clare amiably. Charisse runs into the house for garbage bags and covers the
seats. We hop in and away we go. Clare leans against me and clenches my hands in hers.
Dont leave me, she says.
I wont I tell her. I meet Gomezs eyes in the rearview mirror.
It hurts, Clare says. Oh, God, it hurts.
Think of something else. Something nice, I say. We are racing down Western Avenue,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
284
headed south. Theres hardly any traffic.
Tell me...
I cast about and come up with my most recent sojourn into Clares childhood. Remember
the day we went to the lake, when you were twelve? And we went swimming, and you were
telling me about getting your period? Clare is gripping my hands with bone-shattering
strength.
Did I?
Yeah, you were sort of embarrassed but also real proud of your-Setf- ?.. You were
wearing a pink and green bikini, and these yellow sunglasses with hearts molded into the
frames.
I rememberah!oh, Henry, it hurts, it hurts!
Charisse turns around and says, Come on, Clare, its just the baby leaning on your spine,
youve got to turn, okay? Clare tries to change her position.
Here we are, Gomez says, turning into Mercy Hospitals Emergency Unloading Zone.
Im leaking, Clare says. Gomez stops the car, jumps out, and we gently remove Clare
from the car. She takes two steps and her water breaks.
Good timing, kitten, Gomez says. Charisse runs ahead with our paperwork, and Gomez
and I walk Clare slowly through ER and down long corridors to the OB wing. She stands
leaning against the nurses station while they nonchalantly prepare a room for her.
Dont leave me, Clare whispers.
I wont I tell her again. I wish I could be sure about this. I am feeling cold and a little
nauseous. Clare turns and leans into me. I wrap my arms around her. The baby is a hard
roundness between us. Come out, come out wherever you are. Clare is panting. A fat blond
nurse comes and tells us the room is ready. We all troop in. Clare immediately gets down on
the floor on her hands and knees. Charisse starts putting things away, clothes in the closet,
toiletries in the bathroom. Gomez and I stand watching Clare helplessly. She is moaning. We
look at each other. Gomez shrugs.
Charisse says, Hey Clare, how about a bath? Youll feel better in warm water.
Clare nods. Charisse makes a motion with her hands at Gomez that means shoo. Gomez
says, I think Ill go have a smoke, and leaves.
Should I stay? I ask Clare.
Yes! Dont gostay where I can see you.
Okay. I walk into the bathroom to run the bathwater. Hospital bathrooms creep me out.
They always smell like cheap soap and diseased flesh. I turn on the tap, wait for the water to
get warm.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
285
Henry! Are you there? Clare calls out.
I stick my head back into the room. Im here.
Stay in here, Clare commands, and Charisse takes my place in the bathroom. Clare
makes a sound that I have never heard a human being make before, a deep despairing groan
of agony. What have I done to her? I think of twelve-year-old Clare laughing and covered
with wet sand on a blanket, in her first bikini, at the beach. Oh, Clare, Im sorry, Im sorry.
An older black nurse comes in and checks Clares cervix.
Good girl, she coos to Clare. Six centimeters.
Clare nods, smiles, and then grimaces. She clutches her belly and doubles over, moaning
louder. The nurse and I hold her. Clare gasps for breath, and then starts to scream. Amit
Montague walks in and rushes to her.
Baby baby baby, hush The nurse is giving Dr. Montague a bunch of information that
means nothing to me. Clare is sobbing. I clear my throat. My voice comes out in a croak.
How about an epidural?
Clare?
Clare nods. People crowd into the room with tubes and needles and machines. I sit
holding Clares hand, watching her face. She is lying on her side, whimpering, her face wet
with sweat and tears as the anesthesiologist hooks up an IV and inserts a needle into her
spine. Dr. Montague is examining her, and frowning at the fetal monitor.
Whats wrong? Clare asks her. Somethings wrong.
The heartbeat is very fast. She is scared, your little girl. You have to be calm, Clare, so
the baby can be calm, yes?
It hurts so much.
That is because she is big. Amit Montagues voice is quiet, soothing. The burly walrusmustachioed
anesthesiologist looks at me, bored, over Claires body. But now we are giving
you a little cocktail, eh, some narcotics sonic analgesic, soon you will relax, and the baby
will relax, yes? Clare nods, yes. Dr. Montague smiles. And Henry, how are you?
Not very relaxed. I try to smile. I could use some of whatever it is they are giving Clare.
I am experiencing slight double vision; I breathe deeply and it goes away.
Things are improving: see? says Dr. Montague. It is like a cloud that passes over, the
pain goes away, we take it somewhere and leave it by the side of the road, all by itself, and
you and the little one are still here, yes? It is pleasant here, we will take our time, there is no
hurry.... The tension has left Clares face. Her eyes are fixed on Dr. Montague. The
machines beep. The room is dim. Outside the sun is rising. Dr. Montague is watching the
fetal monitor. Tell her you are fine, and she is fine. Sing her a song, yes?
Alba, its okay, Clare says softly. She looks at me. Say the poem about the lovers on
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
286
the carpet.
I blank, and then I remember. I feel self-conscious reciting Rilke in front of all these
people, and so I begin:  Engell: Es ware ein Platz, den wir nicht wissen
Say it in English, Clare interrupts.
Sorry. I change my position, so that I am sitting by Clares belly with my back to
Charisse and the nurse and the doctor, I slide my hand under Clares button-strained shirt. I
can feel the outline of Alba through Clares hot skin.
Angel! I say to Clare, as though we are in our own bed, as though we have been up all
night on less momentous errands,
Angel!: If there were a place that we didnt know of and there,
on some unsayable carpet, lovers displayed
what they could never bring to mastery here the bold
exploits of their high-flying hearts,
their towers of pleasure, their ladders
that have long since been standing where there was no ground, leaning
just on each other, trembling, and could master all this,
before the surrounding spectators, the innumerable soundless dead:
 Would these, then, throw down their final,
forever saved-up, forever hidden, unknown to us, eternally valid
coins of happiness before the at last
genuinely smiling pair on the gratified
carpet?
There, says Dr. Montague, clicking off the monitor. Everyone is serene. She beams at
us all, and glides out the door, followed by the nurse. I accidentally catch the eye of the
anesthesiologist, whose expression plainly says What kind of a pussy are you, anyway?
CLARE: The sun is coming up and I am lying numb on this strange bed in this pink room and
somewhere in the foreign country that is my uterus Alba is crawling toward home, or away
from home. The pain has left but I know that it has not gone far, that it is sulking somewhere
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
287
in a corner or under the bed and it will jump out when I least expect it. The contractions
come and go, remote, muffled like the peal of bells through fog. Henry lies down next to me.
People come and go. I feel like throwing up, but I dont. Charisse gives me shaved ice out of
a paper cup; it tastes like stale snow. I watch the tubes and the red blinking lights and I think
about Mama. I breathe. Henry watches me. He looks so tense and unhappy. I start to worry
again that he will vanish. Its okay, I say. He nods. He strokes my belly. Im sweating. Its
so hot in here. The nurse comes in and checks on me. Amit checks on me. I am somehow
alone with Alba in the midst of everyone. Its okay, I tell her. Youre doing fine, youre not
hurting me. Henry gets up and paces back and forth until I ask him to stop. I feel as though
all my organs are becoming creatures, each with its own agenda, its own train to catch. Alba
is tunneling headfirst into me, a bone and flesh excavator of my flesh and bone, a deepener
of my depths. I imagine her swimming through me, I imagine her falling into the stillness of
a morning pond, water parting at her velocity. I imagine her face, I want to see her face. I tell
the anesthesiologist I want to feel something. Gradually the numbness recedes and the pain
comes back, but its different pain now. Its okay pain. Time passes.
Time passes and the pain begins to roll in and out as though its a woman standing at an
ironing board, passing the iron back and forth, back and forth across a white tablecloth. Amit
comes in and says its time, time to go to the delivery room. I am shaved and scrubbed and
moved onto a gurney and rolled through hallways. I watch the ceilings of the hallways roll
by, and Alba and I are rolling toward meeting each other, and Henry is walking beside us. In
the delivery room everything is green and white. I smell detergent, it reminds me of Etta, and
I want Etta but she is at Meadowlark, and I look up at Henry who is wearing surgical scrubs
and I think why are we here we should be at home and then I feel as though Alba is surging,
rushing and I push without thinking and we do this again and again like a game, like a song.
Someone says Hey, whered the Dad go? I look around but Henry is gone, he is nowhere not
here and I think God damn him, but no, I dont mean it God, but Alba is coming, she is
coming and then I see Henry, he stumbles into my vision, disoriented and naked but here,
hes here! and Amit says Sucre Dieu! and then Ah, she has crowned, and I push and Albas
head comes out and I put my hand down to touch her head, her delicate slippery wet velvet
head and I push and push and Alba tumbles into Henrys waiting hands and someone says
Oh! and I am empty and released and I hear a sound like an old vinyl record when you put
the needle in the wrong groove and then Alba yells out and suddenly she is here, someone
places her on my belly and I look down and her face, Albas face, is so pink and creased and
her hair is so black and her eyes blindly search and her hands reach out and Alba pulls
herself up to my breasts and she pauses, exhausted by the effort, by the sheer fact of
everything.
Henry leans over me and touches her forehead, and says, Alba.
Later:
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
288
CLARE: Its the evening of Albas first day on earth. Im lying in bed in the hospital room
surrounded by balloons and teddy bears and flowers with Alba in my arms. Henry is sitting
cross-legged on the foot of the bed taking pictures of us. Alba has just finished nursing and
she blows colostrum bubbles from her tiny lips and then falls asleep, a soft warm bag of skin
and fluid against my nightgown. Henry finishes the roll of film and unloads the camera.
Hey, I say, suddenly remembering. Where did you go? In the delivery room?
Henry laughs. You know, I was hoping you hadnt noticed that. I thought maybe you
were so preoccupied
Where were you?
I was wandering around my old elementary school in the middle of the night.
For how long? I ask.
Oh, god. Hours. It was beginning to get light when I left. It was winter and they had the
heat turned way down. How long was I gone?
Im not sure. Maybe five minutes?
Henry shakes his head. I was frantic. I mean, I had just abandoned you, and there I was
just drifting around uselessly through the hallways of Francis Parker.... It was so...I felt so..
Henry smiles. But it turned out okay, hmm?
I laugh. Alls well that ends well.
Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of. There is a quiet knock on the door; Henry
says, Come in! and Richard steps into the room and then stops, hesitant. Henry turns and
says, Dad and then stops, and then jumps off the bed and says, Come in, have a seat.
Richard is carrying flowers and a small teddy bear which Henry adds to the pile on the
windowsill.
Clare, says Richard. Icongratulations. He sinks slowly into the chair beside the
bed.
Um, would you like to hold her? Henry asks softly. Richard nods, looking at me to see
if I agree. Richard looks as though he hasnt slept for days. His shirt needs ironing and he
stinks of sweat and the iodine reek of old beer. I smile at him although I am wondering if this
is such a hot idea. I hand Alba over to Henry who carefully transfers her into Richards
awkward arms. Alba turns her pink round face up to Richards long unshaven one, turns
toward his chest and searches for a nipple. After a moment she gives up and yawns, then
goes back to sleep. He smiles. I had forgotten how Richards smile can transform his face.
Shes beautiful, he tells me. And, to Henry, She looks like your mother.
Henry nods. Theres your violinist, Dad. He smiles. It skipped a generation.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
289
A violinist? Richard looks down at the sleeping baby, black hair and tiny hands, fast
asleep. No one ever looked less like a concert violinist than Alba does right now. A
violinist. He shakes his head. But how do you No, never mind. So you are a violinist, are
you now, little girl? Alba sticks out her tongue a tiny bit and we all laugh.
Shell need a teacher, once shes old enough, I suggest.
A teacher? Yes...Youre not going to hand her over to those Suzuki idiots, are you?
Richard demands.
Henry coughs. Er, actually we were hoping that if you had nothing better to do...
Richard gets it. Its a pleasure to see him comprehend, to see him realize that someone
needs him, that only he can give his only granddaughter the training she will need.
Id be delighted, he says, and Albas future unrolls in front of her like a red carpet as far
as the eye can see.
Tuesday, September 11, 2001 (Clare is 30, Henry is 38)
CLARE: I wake up at 6:43 and Henry is not in bed. Alba isnt in her crib, either. My breasts
hurt. My cunt hurts. Everything hurts. I get out of bed very carefully, go to the bathroom. I
walk through the hall, the dining room, slowly. In the living room Henry is sitting on the
couch with Alba cradled in his arms, not watching the little black and white television with
the sound turned low. Alba is asleep. I sit down next to Henry. He puts his arm around me.
How come youre up? I ask him. I thought you said it wasnt for a couple of hours
yet? On the TV a weatherman is smiling and pointing at a satellite picture of the Midwest.
I couldnt sleep, Henry says. I wanted to listen to the world being normal for a little
while longer.
Oh. I lean my head on Henrys shoulder and close my eyes. When I open them again a
commercial for a cell phone company is ending and a commercial for bottled water comes
on. Henry hands Alba to me and gets up. In a minute I hear him making breakfast. Alba
wakes up and I undo my nightgown and feed her. My nipples hurt. I watch the television. A
blond anchorperson tells me something, smiling. He and the other anchorperson, an Asian
woman, laugh and smile at me. At City Hall, Mayor Daley is answering questions. I doze.
Alba sucks at me. Henry brings in a tray of eggs, toast, and orange juice. I want coffee.
Henry has tactfully drunk his in the kitchen, but I can smell it on his breath. He sets the tray
on the coffee table and puts my plate on my lap. I eat my eggs as Alba nurses. Henry mops
up yolk with his toast. On TV a bunch of kids are skidding across grass, to demonstrate the
effectiveness of some laundry detergent. We finish eating; Alba finishes, too. I burp her and
Henry takes all the dishes to the kitchen. When he comes back I pass her to him and head to
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
290
the bathroom. I take a shower. The water is so hot I almost cant stand it, but it feels
heavenly on my sore body. I breathe the steamy air, dry my skin gingerly, rub balm on my
lips, breasts, stomach. The mirror is all steamed up, so I dont have to see myself. I comb my
hair. I pull on sweatpants and a sweater. I feel deformed, deflated. In the living room Henry
is sitting with his eyes closed, and Alba is sucking her thumb. As I sit down again Alba
opens her eyes and makes a mewing sound. Her thumb slips out of her mouth and she looks
confused. A Jeep is driving through a desert landscape. Henry has turned off the sound. He
massages his eyes with his fingers. I fall asleep again.
Henry says, Wake up, Clare. I open my eyes. The television picture swerves around. A
city street. A sky. A white skyscraper on fire. An airplane, toylike, slowly flies into the
second white tower. Silent flames shoot up. Henry turns up the sound. Oh my god, says the
voice of the television. Oh my god.
Tuesday, June 11, 2002 (Clare is 31)
CLARE: Im making a drawing of Alba. At this moment Alba is nine months and five days
old. She is sleeping on her back, on a small light blue flannel blanket, on the yellow ochre
and magenta Chinese rug on the living room floor. She has just finished nursing. My breasts
are light, almost empty. Alba is so very asleep that I feel perfectly okay about walking out
the back door and across the yard into my studio.
For a minute I stand in the doorway inhaling the slightly musty unused studio odor. Then
I rummage around in my flat file, find some persimmon-tanned paper that looks like
cowhide, grab a few pastels and other implements and a drawing board and walk (with only a
small pang of regret) out the door and back into the house.
The house is very quiet. Henry is at work (I hope) and I can hear the washing machine
churning away in the basement. The air conditioner whines. Theres a faint rumble of traffic
on Lincoln Avenue. I sit down on the rug next to Alba. A trapezoid of sunlight is inches
away from her small pudgy feet. In half an hour it will cover her.
I clip my paper to the drawing board and arrange my pastels next to me on the rug. Pencil
in hand, I consider my daughter.
Alba is sleeping deeply. Her ribcage rises and falls slowly and I can hear the soft grunt
she makes with each exhalation. I wonder if shes getting a cold. Its warm in here, on this
June late afternoon, and Albas wearing a diaper and nothing else. Shes a little flushed. Her
left hand is clenching and unclenching rhythmically. Maybe shes dreaming music.
I begin to rough in Albas head, which is turned toward me. I am not thinking about this,
really. My hand is moving across the paper like the needle of a seismograph, recording
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
291
Albas form as I absorb it with my eyes. I note the way her neck disappears in the folds of
baby fat under her chin, how the soft indentations above her knees alter slightly as she kicks,
once, and is still again. My pencil describes the convexity of Albas full belly which
submerges into the top of her diaper, an abrupt and angular line cutting across her roundness.
I study the paper, adjust the angle of Albas legs, redraw the crease where her right arm joins
her torso.
I begin to lay in pastel. I start by sketching in highlights in white down her tiny nose,
along her left side, across her knuckles, her diaper, the edge of her left foot. Then I rough in
shadows, in dark green and ultramarine. A deep shadow clings to Albas right side where her
body meets the blanket. Its like a pool of water, and I put it in solidly. Now the Alba in the
drawing suddenly becomes three-dimensional, leaps off the page.
I use two pink pastels, a light pink the hue of the inside of a shell and a dark pink that
reminds me of raw tuna. With rapid strokes I make Albas skin. It is as though Albas skin
was hidden in the paper, and I am removing some invisible substance that concealed it. Over
this pastel skin I use a cool violet to make Albas ears and nose and mouth (her mouth is
slightly open in a tiny O). Her black and abundant hair becomes a mixture of dark blue and
black and red on the paper. I take care with her eyebrows, which seem so much like furry
caterpillars that have found a home on Albas face.
The sunlight covers Alba now. She stirs, brings her small hand over her eyes, and sighs. I
write her name, and my name, and the date at the bottom of the paper.
The drawing is finished. It will serve as a recordI loved you, I made you, and I made
this for youlong after I am gone, and Henry is gone, and even Alba is gone. It will say, we
made you, and here you are, here and now.
Alba opens her eyes and smiles.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
292
SECRET
Sunday, October 12, 2003 (Clare is 32, Henry is 40)
CLARE: This is a secret: sometimes I am glad when Henry is gone. Sometimes I enjoy being
alone. Sometimes I walk through the house late at night and I shiver with the pleasure of not
talking, not touching, just walking, or sitting, or taking a bath. Sometimes I lie on the living
room floor and listen to Fleetwood Mac, the Bangles, the B-52s, the Eagles, bands Henry
cant stand. Sometimes I go for long walks with Alba and I dont leave a note saying where I
am. Sometimes I meet Celia for coffee, and we talk about Henry, and Ingrid, and whoever
Celias seeing that week. Sometimes I hang out with Charisse and Gomez, and we dont talk
about Henry, and we manage to enjoy ourselves. Once I went to Michigan and when I came
back Henry was still gone and I never told him I had been anywhere. Sometimes I get a
baby-sitter and I go to the movies or I ride my bicycle after dark along the bike path by
Montrose beach with no lights; its like flying.
Sometimes I am glad when Henrys gone, but Im always glad when he comes back.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
293
EXPERIENCING TECHNICAL DIFFICULTIES
Friday, May 7, 2004 (Henry is 40, Clare is 32)
HENRY: We are at the opening of Clares exhibit at the Chicago Cultural Center. She has
been working nonstop for a year, building huge, ethereal bird skeletons out of wire, wrapping
them in translucent strips of paper, coating them with shellac until they transmit light. Now
the sculptures hang from the high ceiling, and squat on the floor. Some of them are kinetic,
motorized: a few beat their wings, and there are two cock skeletons slowly demolishing each
other in a corner. An eight-foot-tall pigeon dominates the entrance. Clare is exhausted, and
ecstatic. Shes wearing a simple black silk dress, her hair is piled high on her head. People
have brought her flowers; she has a bouquet of white roses in her arms, theres a heap of
plastic-wrapped bouquets next to the guest book. Its very crowded. People circle around,
exclaim over each piece, crane their heads back to look at the flying birds. Everyone
congratulates Clare. There was a glowing review in this mornings Tribune. All our friends
are here, and Clares family has driven in from Michigan. They surround Clare now, Philip,
Alicia, Mark and Sharon and their kids, Nell, Etta. Charisse takes pictures of them, and they
all smile for her. When she gives us copies of the pictures, a few weeks from now, I will be
struck by the dark circles under Clares eyes, and by how thin she looks.
I am holding Albas hand. We stand by the back wall, out of the crowd. Alba cant see
anything, because everyone is tall, and so I lift her on to my shoulders. She bounces.
Clares family has dispersed and she is being introduced to a very well-dressed elderly
couple by Leah Jacobs, her dealer. Alba says, I want Mama.
Mamas busy, Alba, I say. I am feeling queasy. I bend over and set Alba on the floor.
She puts her arms up.  No. I want Mama. I sit on the floor and put my head between my
knees. I need to find a place where no one can see me. Alba is pulling my ear. Dont, Alba,
I say. I look up. My father is making his way to us through the crowd. Go, I tell Alba. I
give her a little push. Go see Grandpa. She starts to whimper. I dont see Grandpa. I want
Mama. I am crawling toward Dad. I bump into someones legs. I hear Alba screaming,
Mama! as I vanish.
CLARE: There are masses of people. Everyone presses at me, smiling. I smile at them. The
show looks great, and its done, its up! Im so happy, and so tired. My face hurts from
smiling. Everyone I know is here. Im talking to Celia when I hear a commotion at the back
of the gallery, and then I hear Alba screaming, Mama! Where is Henry? I try to get
through the crowd to Alba. Then I see her: Richard has lifted her up. People part to let me
through. Richard hands Alba to me. She locks her legs around my waist, buries her face in
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
294
my shoulder, wraps her arms around my neck, Wheres Daddy? I ask her softly. Gone,
says Alba.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
295
NATURE MORTE
Sunday, July 11, 2004 (Clare is 33, Henry is 41)
CLARE: Henry is sleeping, bruised and caked with blood, on the kitchen floor. I dont want to
move him or wake him. I sit with him on the cool linoleum for a while. Eventually I get up
and make coffee. As the coffee streams into the pot and the grounds make little exploding
puffs, Henry whimpers and puts his hands over his eyes. Its obvious that he has been beaten.
One eye is swollen shut. The blood seems to have come from his nose. I dont see any
wounds, just radiant purple fist-sized bruises all over his body. He is very thin; I can see all
his vertebrae and ribs. His pelvis juts, his cheeks are hollow. His hair has grown down almost
to his shoulders, there is gray shot through it. There are cuts on his hands and feet, and insect
bites everywhere on his body. He is very tanned, and filthy, grime under nails, dirt sweated
into creases of his skin. He smells of grass, blood, and salt. After watching him and sitting
with him for a while, I decide to wake him. Henry, I say very softly, wake up, now,
youre home...I stroke his face, carefully, and he opens his eye. I can tell hes not quite
awake. Clare, he mumbles. Clare. Tears begin to stream from his good eye, he is shaking
with sobbing, and I pull him into my lap. I am crying. Henry is curled in my lap, there on the
floor, we shake tightly together, rocking, rocking, crying our relief and our anguish together.
Thursday, December 23, 2004 (Clare is 33, Henry is 41)
CLARE: Its the day before Christmas Eve. Henry is at Water Tower Place, taking Alba to see
Santa at Marshall Fields while I finish the shopping. Now Im sitting in the cafe at Borders
Bookstore, drinking cappuccino at a table by the front window and resting my feet with a
pile of bulging shopping bags leaning against my chair. Outside the window the day is fading
and tiny white lights describe every tree. Shoppers hurry up and down Michigan Avenue, and
I can hear the muted clang of the Salvation Army Santas bell below me. I turn back to the
store, scanning for Henry and Alba, and someone calls my name. Kendrick is coming toward
me with his wife, Nancy, and Colin and Nadia in tow.
I can see at a glance that theyve just come from FAO Schwarz; they have the shellshocked
look of parents freshly escaped from toy-store hell. Nadia comes running up to me
squealing Aunt Clare, Aunt Clare! Wheres Alba? Colin smiles shyly and holds out his
hand to show me that he has a tiny yellow tow truck. I congratulate him and tell Nadia that
Albas visiting Santa, and Nadia replies that she already saw Santa last week. What did you
ask for? I query. A boyfriend, says Nadia. Shes three years old. I grin at Kendrick and
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
296
Nancy. Kendrick says something, sotto voce, to Nancy, and she says, Come on, troops, we
have to find a book for Aunt Silvie, and the three of them go pelting off to the bargain
tables. Kendrick gestures at the empty chair across from me. May I? Sure.
He sits down, sighing deeply. I hate Christmas.
You and Henry both.
Does he? I didnt know that. Kendrick leans against the window and closes his eyes.
Just as I think that hes actually asleep he opens them and says, Is Henry following his drug
regimen?
Um, I guess. I mean, as closely as he can, considering that hes been time traveling a lot
lately.
Kendrick drums his fingers on the table. How much is a lot?
Every couple days.
Kendrick looks furious. Why doesnt he tell me these things?
I think hes afraid youll get upset with him and quit.
Hes the only test subject I have who can talk and he never tells me anything!
I laugh. Join the club.
Kendrick says, Im trying to do science. I need him to tell me when something doesnt
work. Otherwise were all just spinning our wheels.
I nod. Outside it has started to snow.
Clare?
Hmm?
Why wont you let me look at Albas DNA?
Ive had this conversation a hundred times with Henry. Because first youd just want to
locate all the markers in her genes, and that would be okay. But then you and Henry would
start to badger me to let you try out drugs on her, and that is not okay. Thats why.
But shes still very young; she has a better chance of responding positively to the
medication.
I said no. When Alba is eighteen she can decide for herself. So far, everything youve
given Henry has been a nightmare. I cant look at Kendrick. I say this to my hands, tightly
folded on the table.
But we might be able to develop gene therapy for her
People have died from gene therapy.
Kendrick is silent. The noise level in the store is overwhelming. Then from the babble I
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
297
hear Alba calling, Mama! I look up and see her riding on Henrys shoulders, clutching his
head with her hands. Both of them are wearing coonskin caps. Henry sees Kendrick and for a
brief moment he looks apprehensive and I wonder what secrets these two men are keeping
from me. Then Henry smiles and comes striding toward us, Alba bobbing happily above the
crowd. Kendrick rises to greet him, and I push the thought away.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
298
BIRTHDAY
Wednesday, May 24, 1989 (Henry is 41, Clare is 18)
HENRY: I come to with a thud and skid across the painful stubble of the Meadow on my side,
ending up dirty and bloody at Clares feet. She is sitting on the rock, coolly immaculate in a
white silk dress, white stockings and shoes, and short white gloves. Hello, Henry, she says,
as though I have just dropped in for tea.
Whats up? I ask. You look like youre on your way to your first communion.
Clare sits up very straight and says, Today is May 24, 1989. I think fast. Happy
birthday. Do you happen to have a Bee Gees outfit squirreled away somewhere around here
for me? Without deigning to reply Clare glides off the rock and, reaching behind it,
produces a garment bag. With a flourish she unzips it to reveal a tuxedo, pants, and one of
those infernal formal shirts that require studs. She produces a suitcase containing underwear,
a cummerbund, a bow tie, studs, and a gardenia. I am seriously alarmed, and not forewarned.
I ponder the available data. Clare. Were not getting married today or anything insane like
that, are we? Because I know for a fact that our anniversary is in the fall. October. Late
October.
Clare turns away while I am dressing. You mean you cant remember our anniversary?
How male.
I sigh. Darling, you know I know, I just cant get at it right now. But anyway. Happy
Birthday.
Im eighteen.
Heavens, so you are. It seems like only yesterday that you were six.
Clare is intrigued, as always, with the notion that I have recently visited some other Clare,
older or younger. Have you seen me when I was six lately?
Well, just now I was lying in bed with you reading Emma. You were thirty-three. I am
forty-one at the moment, and feeling every minute. I comb through my hair with my fingers
and run my hand over my stubble, Im sorry, Clare. Im afraid Im not at my best for your
birthday. I fasten the gardenia through the buttonhole of the tuxedo and start to do up the
studs. I saw you at six about two weeks ago. You drew me a picture of a duck.
Clare blushes. The blush spreads like drops of blood in a bowl of milk.
Are you hungry? I made us a feast!
Of course Im hungry. Im famished, gaunt, and considering cannibalism.
That wont be necessary just yet.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
299
There is something in her tone that pulls me up. Something is going on that I dont know
about, and Clare expects me to know it. She is practically humming with excitement. I
contemplate the relative merits of a simple confession of ignorance versus continuing to fake
it. I decide to let it go for a while. Clare is spreading out a blanket which will later end up on
our bed. I carefully sit down on it and am comforted by its pale green familiarity. Clare
unpacks sandwiches, little paper cups, silverware, crackers, a tiny black jar of supermarket
caviar, Thin Mint Girl Scout cookies, strawberries, a bottle of Cabernet with a fancy label,
Brie cheese which looks a bit melted, and paper plates.
Clare. Wine! Caviar! I am impressed, and somehow not amused. She hands me the
Cabernet and the corkscrew. Um, I dont think Ive ever mentioned this, but Im not
supposed to drink. Doctors orders. Clare looks crestfallen. But I can certainly eat.. .I can
pretend to be drinking. I mean, if that would be helpful. I cant shake the feeling that we are
playing house. I didnt know you drank. Alcohol. I mean, Ive hardly ever seen you drink
any.
Well, I dont really like it, but since this is a momentous occasion I thought it would be
nice to have wine. Champagne probably would have been better, but this was in the pantry,
so I brought it along.
I open the wine and pour us each a small cup. We toast each other silently. I pretend to sip
mine. Clare takes a mouthful, swallows it in a businesslike fashion, and says, Well, thats
not so bad.
Thats a twenty-something-dollar bottle of wine.
Oh. Well, that was marvelous.
Clare. She is unwrapping dark rye sandwiches which seem to be overflowing with
cucumbers. I hate to be obtuse...I mean, obviously its your birthday....
My eighteenth birthday she agrees.
Um, well, to begin with, Im really upset that I dont have a present for you... Clare
looks up, surprised, and I realize that Im warm, Im on to something here, but you know I
never know when Im coming, and I cant bring anything with me...
I know all that. But dont you remember, we worked it all out last time you were here;
because on the List today is the last day left and also my birthday. You dont remember?
Clare is looking at me very intently, as though concentration can move memory from her
mind to mine.
Oh. I havent been there yet. I mean, that conversation is still in my future. I wonder why
I didnt tell you then? I still have lots of dates on the list left to go. Is today really the last
day? You know, well be meeting each other in the present in a couple years. Well see each
other then.
But thats a long time. For me.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
300
There is an awkward pause. Its strange to think that right now I am in Chicago, twentyfive
years old, going about my business, completely unaware of Clares existence, and for
that matter, oblivious to my own presence here in this lovely Michigan meadow on a
gorgeous spring day which is the eighteenth anniversary of her birth. We are using plastic
knives to apply caviar to Ritz crackers. For a while there is much crunching and furious
consumption of sandwiches. The conversation seems to have foundered. And then I wonder,
for the first time, if perhaps Clare is being entirely truthful with me here, knowing as she
does that I am on slippery terms with statements that begin I never, since I never have a
complete inventory of my past handy at any given moment, since my past is inconveniently
compounded with my future. We move on to the strawberries.
Clare. She smiles, innocently. What exactly did we decide, the last time you saw me?
What were we planning to do for your birthday?
Shes blushing again. Well, this  she says, gesturing at our picnic.
Anything else? I mean, this is wonderful.
Well. Yes. Im all ears, because I think I know whats coming.
Yes?
Clare is quite pink but manages to look otherwise dignified as she says, We decided to
make love.
Ah. I have, actually, always wondered about Clares sexual experiences prior to
October 26, 1991, when we met for the first time in the present. Despite some pretty amazing
provocation on Clares part I have refused to make love to her and have spent many amusing
hours chatting with her about this and that while trying to ignore painful hard-ons. But today,
Clare is legally, if perhaps not emotionally, an adult, and surely I cant warp her life too
much.. .that is to say, Ive already given her a pretty weird childhood just by being in her
childhood at all. How many girls have their very own eventual husband appearing at regular
intervals buck naked before their eyes? Clare is watching me think this through. I am
thinking about the first time I made love to Clare and wondering if it was the first time she
made love to me. I decide to ask her about this when I get back to my present. Meanwhile,
Clare is tidying things back into the picnic basket.
So?
What the hell. Yes.
Clare is excited and also scared. Henry. Youve made love to me lots of times....
Many, many times.
Shes having trouble saying it.
Its always beautiful, I tell her. Its the most beautiful thing in my life. I will be very
gentle. Having said this I am suddenly nervous. Im feeling responsible and Humbert
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
301
Humbertish and also as though I am being watched by many people, and all of those people
are Clare. I have never felt less sexual in my life. Okay. Deep breath. I love you.
We both stand up, lurching a bit on the uneven surface of the blanket. I open my arms and
Clare moves into them. We stand, still, embracing there in the Meadow like the bride and
groom on top of a wedding cake. And after all, this is Clare, come to my forty-one-year-old
self almost as she was when we first met. No fear. She leans her head back. I lean forward
and kiss her.
Clare.
Mmmm?
Youre absolutely sure were alone?
Everyone except Etta and Nell is in Kalamazoo.
Because I feel like Im on Candid Camera, here.
Paranoid. Very sad
Never mind.
We could go to my room.
Too dangerous. God, its like being in high school.
What?
Never mind.
Clare steps back from me and unzips her dress. She pulls it over her head and drops it on
the blanket with admirable unconcern. She steps out of her shoes and peels off her stockings.
She unhooks her bra, discards it, and steps out of her panties. She is standing before me
completely naked. It is a sort of miracle: all the little marks I have become fond of have
vanished; her stomach is flat, no trace of the pregnancies that will bring us such grief, such
happiness. This Clare is a little thinner, and a lot more buoyant than the Clare I love in the
present. I realize again how much sadness has overtaken us. But today all of that is magically
removed; today the possibility of joy is close to us. I kneel, and Clare comes over and stands
in front of me. I press my face to her stomach for a moment, and then look up; Clare is
towering over me, her hands in my hair, with the cloudless blue sky around her.
I shrug off my jacket and undo the tie. Clare kneels and we remove the studs deftly and
with the concentration of a bomb squad. I take off the pants and underwear. Theres no way
to do this gracefully. I wonder how male strippers deal with this problem. Or do they just hop
around on stage, one leg in, one out? Clare laughs. Ive never seen you get undressed. Not a
pretty sight.
You wound me. Come here and let me wipe that smirk off your face.
Uh-oh. In the next fifteen minutes Im proud to say that I have indeed removed all
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
302
traces of superiority from Clares face. Unfortunately shes getting more and more tense,
more.. .defended. In fourteen years and heaven only knows how many hours and days spent
happily, anxiously, urgently, languorously making love with Clare, this is utterly new to me.
I want, if at all possible, for her to feel the sense of wonder I felt when I met her and we
made love for what I thought (silly me) was the first time. I sit up, panting. Clare sits up as
well, and circles her arms around her knees, protectively.
You okay?
Im afraid.
Thats okay. Im thinking. I swear to you that the next time we meet youre going to
practically rape me. I mean, you are really exceptionally talented at this. I am?
You are incandescent, I am rummaging through the picnic basket: cups, wine, condoms,
towels. Clever girl. I pour us each a cup of wine. To virginity.  Had we but world
enough, and time Drink up. She does, obediently, like a small child taking medicine. I refill
her cup, and down my own.
But you arent supposed to drink.
Its a momentous occasion. Bottoms up. Clare weighs about 120 pounds, but these are
Dixie cups. One more.
More? Ill get sleepy.
Youll relax. She gulps it down. We squash up the cups and throw them in the picnic
basket. I lie down on my back with my arms stretched out like a sunbather, or a crucifixion.
Clare stretches out beside me. I gather her in so that we are side by side, facing each other.
Her hair falls across her shoulders and breasts in a very beautiful and touching way and I
wish for the zillionth time that I was a painter.
Clare?
Hmmm?
Imagine yourself as open; empty. Someones come along and taken out all your innards,
and left only nerve endings. Ive got the tip of my index finger on her clit.
Poor little Clare. No innards.
Ah, but its a good thing, you see, because theres all this extra room in there. Think of
all the stuff you could put inside you if you didnt have all those silly kidneys and stomachs
and pancreases and what not.
Like what? Shes very wet. I remove my hand and carefully rip open the condom
packet with my teeth, a maneuver I havent performed in years.
Kangaroos. Toaster ovens. Penises.
Clare takes the condom from me with fascinated distaste. Shes lying on her back and she
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
303
unfurls it and sniffs it. Ugh. Must we?
Although I often refuse to tell Clare things, I seldom actually lie to her. I feel a twinge of
guilt as I say, Fraid so. I retrieve it from her, but instead of putting it on I decide that what
we really need here is cunnilingus. Clare, in her future, is addicted to oral sex and will leap
tall buildings in a single bound and wash the dishes when its not her turn in order to get it. If
cunnilingus were an Olympic event I would medal, no doubt about it. I spread her out and
apply my tongue to her clit.
Oh God, Clare says in a low voice. Sweet Jesus.
No yelling, I warn. Even Etta and Nell will come down to the Meadow to see whats
wrong if Clare really gets going. In the next fifteen minutes I take Clare several steps down
the evolutionary ladder until shes pretty much a limbic core with a few cerebral cortex
peripherals. I roll on the condom and slowly, carefully slide into Clare, imagining things
breaking and blood cascading around me. She has her eyes closed and at first I think shes
not even aware that Im actually inside her even though Im directly over her but then she
opens her eyes and smiles, triumphant, beatific.
I manage to come fairly quickly; Clare is watching me, concentrating, and as I come I see
her face turn to surprise. How strange things are. What odd things we animals do. I collapse
onto her. We are bathed in sweat. I can feel her heart beating. Or perhaps its mine.
I pull out carefully and dispose of the condom. We lie, side by side, looking at the very
blue sky. The wind is making a sea sound with the grass. I look over at Clare. She looks a bit
stunned.
Hey. Clare.
Hey she says weakly.
Did it hurt?
Yes.
Did you like it?
Oh, yes! she says, and starts to cry. We sit up, and I hold her for a while. She is
shaking.
Clare. Clare. Whats wrong?
I cant make out her reply at first, then: Youre going away. Now I wont see you for
years and years.
Only two years. Two years and a few months. She is quiet. Oh, Clare. Im sorry. I
cant help it. Its funny, too, because I was just lying here thinking what a blessing today
was. To be here with you making love instead of being chased by thugs or freezing to death
in some barn or some of the other stupid shit I get to deal with. And when I go back, Im
with you. And today was wonderful. She is smiling, a little. I kiss her.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
304
How come I always have to wait?
Because you have perfect DNA and you arent being thrown around in time like a hot
potato. Besides, patience is a virtue. Clare is pummel-ing my chest with her fists, lightly.
Also, youve known me your whole life, whereas I only meet you when Im twenty-eight.
So I spend all those years before we meet
Fucking other women.
Well, yeah. But, unbeknownst to me, its all just practice for when I meet you. And its
very lonely and weird. If you dont believe me, try it yourself. Ill never know. Its different
when you dont care.
I dont want anybody else.
Good.
Henry just give me a hint. Where do you live? Where do we meet? What day?
One hint. Chicago
More.
Have faith. Its all there, in front of you.
Are we happy?
We are often insane with happiness. We are also very unhappy for reasons neither of us
can do anything about. Like being separated.
So all the time youre here now youre not with me then?
Well, not exactly. I may end up missing only ten minutes. Or ten days. Theres no rule
about it. Thats what makes it hard, for you. Also, I sometimes end up in dangerous
situations, and I come back to you broken and messed up, and you worry about me when Im
gone. Its like marrying a policeman. Im exhausted. I wonder how old I actually am, in real
time. In calendar time Im forty-one, but with all this coming and going perhaps Im really
forty-five or -six. Or maybe Im thirty-nine. Who knows? Theres something I have to tell
her; what was it?
Clare?
Henry.
When you see me again, remember that I wont know you; dont be upset when you see
me and I treat you like a total stranger, because to me you will be brand new. And please
dont blow my mind with everything all at once. Have mercy, Clare.
I will! Oh, Henry stay!
Shh. Ill be with you. We lie down again. The exhaustion permeates me and I will be
gone in a minute.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
305
I love you, Henry. Thank you for.. .my birthday present.
I love you, Clare. Be good.
Im gone.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
306
SECRET
Thursday, February 10, 2005 (Clare is 33, Henry is 41)
CLARE: Its Thursday afternoon and Im in the studio making pale yellow kozo paper.
Henrys been gone for almost twenty-four hours now, and as usual Im torn between thinking
obsessively about when and where he might be and being pissed at him for not being here
and worrying about when hell be back. Its not helping my concentration and Im ruining a
lot of sheets; I plop them off the su and back into the vat. Finally I take a break and pour
myself a cup of coffee. Its cold in the studio, and the water in the vat is supposed to be cold
although I have warmed it a little to save my hands from cracking. I wrap my hands around
the ceramic mug. Steam wafts up. I put my face over it, inhale the moisture and coffee smell.
And then, oh thank you, God, I hear Henry whistling as he comes up the path through the
garden, into the studio. He stomps the snow off his boots and shrugs off his coat. Hes
looking marvelous, really happy. My heart is racing and I take a wild guess: May 24,
1989?
 Yes, oh, yes! Henry scoops me up, wet apron and Wellingtons and all, and swings me
around. Now Im laughing, were both laughing. Henry exudes delight. Why didnt you tell
me? Ive been needlessly wondering all these years. Vixen! Minx! Hes biting my neck and
tickling me.
But you didnt know, so I couldnt tell you.
Oh. Right. My God, youre amazing. We sit on the grungy old studio couch. Can we
turn up the heat in here?
Sure. Henry jumps up and turns the thermostat higher. The furnace kicks in. How long
was I gone?
Almost a whole day.
Henry sighs. Was it worth it? A day of anxiety in exchange for a few really beautiful
hours?
Yes. That was one of the best days of my life. I am quiet, remembering. I often invoke
the memory of Henrys face above me, surrounded by blue sky, and the feeling of being
permeated by him. I think about it when hes gone and Im having trouble sleeping.
Tell me....
Mmmm? We are wrapped around each other, for warmth, for reassurance.
What happened after I left?
I picked everything up and made myself more or less presentable and went back up to
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
307
the house. I got upstairs without running into anyone and I took a bath. After a while Etta
started hammering on the door wanting to know why I was in the tub in the middle of the day
and I had to pretend I was sick. And I was, in a way...I spent the summer lounging around,
sleeping a lot. Reading. I just kind of rolled up into myself. I spent some time down in the
Meadow, sort of hoping you might show up. I wrote you letters. I burned them. I stopped
eating for a while and Mom dragged me to her therapist and I started eating again. At the end
of August my parents informed me that if I didnt perk up I wouldnt be going to school
that fall, so I immediately perked up because my whole goal in life was to get out of the
house and go to Chicago. And school was a good thing; it was new, I had an apartment, I
loved the city. I had something to think about besides the fact that I had no idea where you
were or how to find you. By the time I finally did run into you I was doing pretty well; I was
into my work, I had friends, I got asked out quite a bit
Oh?
Sure.
Did you go? Out?
Well, yeah. I did. In the spirit of research.. .and because I occasionally got mad that
somewhere out there you were obliviously dating other women. But it was all a sort of black
comedy. I would go out with some perfectly nice pretty young art boy, and spend the whole
evening thinking about how boring and futile it was and checking my watch. I stopped after
five of them because I could see that I was really pissing these guys off. Someone put the
word out at school that I was a dyke and then I got a wave of girls asking me out.
I could see you as a lesbian.
Yeah; behave yourself or Ill convert.
Ive always wanted to be a lesbian. Henry is looking dreamy and heavy-lidded; not fair
when I am wound up and ready to jump on him. He yawns. Oh, well, not in this lifetime.
Too much surgery.
In my head I hear the voice of Father Compton behind the grille of the confessional, softly
asking me if theres anything else I want to confess. No, I tell him firmly. No, there isnt.
That was a mistake. I was drunk, and it doesnt count. The good Father sighs, and pushes the
curtain across. End of confession. My penance is to lie to Henry, by omission, as long as we
both shall live. I look at him, happily postprandial, sated with the charms of my younger self,
and the image of Gomez sleeping, Gomezs bedroom in morning light flashes across my
mental theater. It was a mistake, Henry, I tell him silently. I was waiting, and I got
sideswiped, just once. Tell him, says Father Compton, or somebody, in my head. I cant, I
retort. Hell hate me.
Hey, Henry says gently. Where are you?
Thinking.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
308
You look so sad.
Do you worry sometimes that all the really great stuff has already happened?
No. Well, sort of, but in a different way than you mean. Im still moving through the
time youre reminiscing about, so its not really gone, for me. I worry that we arent paying
close attention here and now. That is, time travel is sort of an altered state, so Im
more...aware when Im out there, and it seems important, somehow, and sometimes I think
that if I could just be that aware here and now, that things would be perfect. But theres been
some great things, lately. He smiles, that beautiful crooked radiant smile, all innocence, and
I allow my guilt to subside, back to the little box where I keep it crammed in like a
parachute.
Alba.
Alba is perfect. And you are perfect. I mean, as much as I love you, back there, its the
shared life, the knowing each other....
Through thick and thin....
The fact that there are bad times makes it more real. Its the reality that I want.
Tell him, tell him.
Even reality can be pretty unreal... If Im ever going to say it, nows the time. He waits.
I just. Cant.
Clare? I regard him miserably, like a child caught in a complicated fib, and then I say it,
almost inaudibly.
I slept with someone. Henrys face is frozen, disbelieving.
Who? he asks, without looking at me,
Gomez.
Why? Henry is still, waiting for the blow.
I was drunk. We were at a party, and Charisse was in Boston
Wait a minute. When was this?
1990.
He starts to laugh. Oh, God. Clare, dont do that to me, shit. 1990. Jesus, I thought you
were telling me something that happened, like, last week. I smile, weakly. He says, I mean,
its not like Im overjoyed about it, but since I just got through telling you to go out and
experiment I cant really...I dunno. Hes getting restless. He gets up and starts pacing
around the studio. I am incredulous. For fifteen years Ive been paralyzed with fear, fear that
Gomez would say something, do something in his big lumbering Gomez callousness, and
Henry doesnt mind. Or does he?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
309
How was it? he asks, quite casually, with his back to me as he messes with the
coffeemaker.
I pick my words with care. Different. I mean, without getting real critical of Gomez
Oh, go ahead.
It was sort of like being a china shop, and trying to get off with a bull.
Hes bigger than me. Henry states this as fact.
I wouldnt know about now, but back then he had no finesse at all. He actually smoked a
cigarette while he was fucking me. Henry winces. I get up, walk over to him. Im sorry. It
was a mistake. He pulls me to him, and I say, softly, into his collar, I was waiting very
patiently... but then I cant go on. Henry is stroking my hair. Its okay, Clare, he says.
Its not so bad. I wonder if he is comparing the Clare he has just seen, in 1989, with the
duplicitous me in his arms, and, as if reading my mind he says, Any other surprises?
That was it.
God, you can really keep a secret. I look at Henry, and he stares back at me, and I can
tell that I have altered for him somehow.
It made me understand, better...it made me appreciate...
Youre trying to tell me that I did not suffer by comparison?
Yes. I kiss him, tentatively, and after a moment of hesitation Henry begins to kiss me
back, and before too long we are on our way to being all right again. Better than all right. I
told him, and it was okay, and he still loves me. My whole body feels lighter, and I sigh with
the goodness of confessing, finally, and not even having a penance, not one Hail Mary or
Our Father. I feel like Ive walked away scot free from a totaled car. Out there, somewhere,
Henry and I are making love on a green blanket in a meadow, and Gomez is looking at me
sleepily and reaching for me with his enormous hands, and everything, everything is
happening now, but its too late, as usual, to change any of it, and Henry and I unwrap each
other on the studio couch like brand new never before boxes of chocolate and its not too
late, not yet, anyway.
Saturday, April 14, 1990 (Clare is 18)
(6:43 a.m.)
CLARE: I open my eyes and I dont know where I am. Cigarette smell. Venetian blind
shadow across cracked yellow wall. I turn my head and beside me, sleeping, in his bed, is
Gomez. Suddenly I remember, and I panic.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
310
Henry. Henry will kill me. Charisse will hate me. I sit up. Gomezs bedroom is a wreck of
overfilled ashtrays, clothes, law textbooks, newspapers, dirty dishes. My clothes lie in a
small, accusing pile on the floor beside me.
Gomez sleeps beautifully. He looks serene, not like a guy whos just cheated on his
girlfriend with his girlfriends best friend. His blond hair is wild, not in its usual perfect
controlled state. He looks like an overgrown boy, exhausted from too many boyish games.
My head is pounding. My insides feel like theyve been beaten. I get up, shakily, and
walk down the hall to the bathroom, which is dank and mold-infested and filled with shaving
paraphernalia and damp towels. Once Im in the bathroom Im not sure what I wanted; I pee
and I wash my face with the hard soap sliver, and I look at myself in the mirror to see if I
look any different, to see if Henry will be able to tell just by looking at me.. .I look kind of
nauseous, but otherwise I just look the way I look at seven in the morning.
The house is quiet. Theres a clock ticking somewhere nearby. Gomez shares this house
with two other guys, friends who are also at Northwesterns Law School. I dont want to run
into anyone. I go back to Gomezs room and sit on the bed.
Good morning. Gomez smiles at me, reaches out to me. I recoil, and burst into tears.
Whoa. Kitten! Clare, baby, hey, hey... He scrambles up and soon I am weeping in his arms.
I think of all the times I have cried on Henrys shoulder. Where are you? I wonder
desperately. I need you, here and now. Gomez is saying rny name, over and over. What am I
doing here, without any clothes on, crying in the embrace of an equally naked Gomez? He
reaches over and hands me a box of tissue, and I blow my nose, and wipe my eyes, and then I
look at him with a look of unconditional despair, and he looks back at me in confusion.
Okay now?
No. How can I be okay? Yeah.
Whats wrong?
I shrug. Gomez shifts into cross-examining fragile witness mode.
Clare, have you ever had sex before? I nod. Is it Charisse? You feel bad about it cause
of Charisse? I nod. Did I do something wrong? I shake my head. Clare, who is Henry? I
gape at him incredulously.
How do you know?... Now Ive done it. Shit. Son of a bitch.
Gomez leans over and grabs his cigarettes from the bedside table, and lights one. He
waves out the match and takes a deep drag. With a cigarette
in his hand, Gomez seems more...dressed, somehow, even though hes not. He silently
offers me one, and I take it, even though I dont smoke. It just seems like the thing to do, and
it buys me time to think about what to say. He lights it for me, gets up, rummages around in
his closet, finds a blue bathrobe that doesnt look all that clean, and hands it to me. I put it
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
311
on; its huge. I sit on the bed, smoking and watching Gomez put on a pair of jeans. Even in
my wretchedness I observe that Gomez is beautiful, tall and broad and...large, an entirely
different sort of beauty from Henrys lithe panther wildness. I immediately feel horrible for
comparing. Gomez sets an ashtray next to me, and sits down on the bed, and looks at me.
You were talking in your sleep to someone named Henry.
Damn. Damn. What did I say?
Mostly just Henry over and over, like you were calling someone to come to you. And
Im sorry. And once you said Well, you werent here, like you were really angry. Who is
Henry?
Henry is my lover.
Clare, you dont have a lover. Charisse and I have seen you almost every day for six
months, and you never date anyone, and no one ever calls you.
Henry is my lover. Hes been gone for a while, and hell be back in the fall of 1991.
Where is he? Somewhere nearby.
I dont know. Gomez thinks I am making this up. For no reason I am determined to
make him believe me. I grab my purse, open my wallet, and show Gomez the photo of
Henry. He studies it carefully.
Ive seen this guy. Well, no: someone a lot like him. This guy is too old to be the same
person. But that guys name was Henry.
My heart is beating like a mad thing. I try to be casual as I ask, Where did you see him?
At clubs. Mostly Exit, and Smart Bar. But I cant imagine that hes your guy; hes a
maniac. Chaos attends his every move. Hes an alcoholic, and hes just... I dont know, hes
really rough on women. Or so I hear.
Violent? I cant imagine Henry hitting a woman.
No. I dont know.
Whats his last name?
I dont know. Listen, kitten, this guy would chew you up and spit you out.. .hes not at
all what you need.
I smile. Hes exactly what I need, but I know that it is futile to go chasing through
clubland trying to find him. What do I need?
Me. Except you dont seem to think so.
You have Charisse. What do you want me for?
I just want you. I dont know why.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
312
You a Mormon or something?
Gomez says very seriously, Clare, I.. .look, Clare
Dont say it.
Really, I
No. I dont want to know. I get up, stub out my cigarette, and start to put my clothes on.
Gomez sits very still and watches me dress. I feel stale and dirty and creepy putting on last
nights party dress in front of Gomez, but I try not to let it show. I cant do the long zipper in
the back of the dress and Gomez gravely helps me with it.
Clare, dont be mad.
Im not mad at you. Im mad at myself.
This guy must be really something if he can walk away from a girl like you and expect
you to be around two years later.
I smile at Gomez. He is amazing. I can see that I have hurt Gomezs feelings. Gomez,
Im sorry. If I was free, and you were free... Gomez shakes his head, and before I know it,
hes kissing me. I kiss back, and theres just a moment when I wonder.... Ive got to go now,
Gomez.
He nods.
I leave.
Friday, April 27, 1990 (Henry is 26)
HENRY: Ingrid and I are at the Riviera Theater, dancing our tiny brains out to the dulcet tones
of Iggy Pop. Ingrid and I are always happiest together when we are dancing or fucking or
anything else that involves physical activity and no talking. Right now we are in heaven.
Were way up front and Mr. Pop is whipping us all into a compact ball of manic energy. I
told Ing once that she dances like a German and she didnt like it, but its true: she dances
seriously, like lives are hanging in the balance, like precision dancing can save the starving
children in India. Its great. The Iggster is crooning  Calling Sister Midnight: well, Im an
idiot for you... and I know exactly how he feels. Its moments like this that I see the point of
me and Ingrid. We slash and burn our way through Lust for Life, China Doll, Funtime. Ingrid
and I have taken enough speed to launch a mission to Pluto, and I have that weird highpitched
feeling and a deep conviction that I could do this, be here, for the rest of my life and
be perfectly content. Ingrid is sweating. Her white T-shirt has glued itself to her body in an
interesting and aesthetically pleasing way and I consider peeling it off of her but refrain,
because shes not wearing a bra and Ill never hear the end of it. We dance, Iggy Pop sings,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
313
and sadly, inevitably, after three encores, the concert finally ends. I feel great. As we file out
with our fellow elated and pumped-up concertgoers, I wonder what we should do next, Ingrid
takes off to go and stand in the long line for the ladies room, and I wait for her out on
Broadway. Im watching a yuppie in a BMW argue with a valet-parking kid over an illegal
space when this huge blond guy walks up to me.
Henry? he asks. I wonder if Im about to be served with a court summons or something.
Yeah?
Clare says hello. Who the hell is Clare?
Sorry, wrong number. Ingrid walks up, looking once again like her usual Bond Girl
self. She sizes up this guy, whos a pretty fine specimen of guyhood. I put my arm around
her.
The guy smiles. Sorry. You must have a double out there. My heart contracts;
somethings going on that I dont get, a little of my future seeping into now, but now is not
the moment to investigate. He seems pleased about something, and excuses himself, and
walks away.
What was that all about? says Ingrid.
I think he thought I was someone else. I shrug. Ingrid looks worried. Just about
everything about me seems to worry Ingrid, so I ignore it. Hey, Ing, what shall we do next?
I feel like leaping tall buildings in a single bound.
My place?
Brilliant. We stop at Margies Candies for ice cream, and soon were in the car chanting
I scream, you scream, we all scream for ice cream and laughing like deranged children.
Later, in bed with Ingrid, I wonder who Clare is, but then I figure theres probably no answer
to that, so I forget about it.
Friday, February 18, 2005 (Henry is 41, Clare is 33)
HENRY: Im taking Charisse to the opera. Its Tristan und Isolde. The reason I am here with
Charisse and not Clare has to do with Clares extreme aversion to Wagner. Im not a huge
Wagnerite either, but we have season tickets and Id just as soon go as not. We were
discussing this one evening at Charisse and Gomezs place, and Charisse wistfully said that
shed never been to the opera. The upshot of it all is that Charisse and I are getting out of a
taxi in front of the Lyric Opera House and Clare is at home minding Alba and playing
Scrabble with Alicia, whos visiting us this week.
Im not really in the mood for this. When I stopped at their house to collect Charisse,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
314
Gomez winked at me and said Dont keep her out too late, son! in his best clueless-parent
voice. I cant remember the last time Charisse and I did anything by ourselves. I like
Charisse, very much, but I dont have much of anything to say to her.
I shepherd Charisse through the crowd. She moves slowly, taking in the splendid lobby,
marble and sweeping high galleries full of elegantly understated rich people and students
with faux fur and pierced noses. Charisse smiles at the libretto vendors, two tuxedoed gents
who stand at the entrance to the lobby singing Libretto! Libretto! Buy yourself a libretto!
in two-part harmony. No one I know is here. Wagnerites are the Green Berets of opera fans;
theyre made of sterner stuff, and they all know each other. Theres a lot of air kissing going
on as Charisse and I walk upstairs to the mezzanine.
Clare and I have a private box; its one of our indulgences. I pull back the curtain and
Charisse steps in and says, Oh! I take her coat and drape it over a chair, and do the same
with mine. We settle ourselves. Charisse crosses her ankles and folds her small hands in her
lap. Her black hair gleams in the low soft light, and with her dark lipstick and dramatic eyes
Charisse is like an exquisite, wicked child, all dressed up, allowed to stay up late with the
grown-ups. She sits and drinks in the beauty of the Lyric, the ornate gold and green screen
that shields the stage, the ripples of cascading plaster that rim every arch and dome, the
excited murmur of the crowd. The lights go down and Charisse flashes me a grin. The screen
rises, and we are on a boat, and Isolde is singing. I lean back in my chair and lose myself in
the current of her voice.
Four hours, one love potion, and a standing ovation later, I turn to Charisse. Well, how
did you like it?
She smiles. It was silly, wasnt it? But the singing made it not silly.
I hold out her coat and she feels around for the arm hole; finds it and shrugs on the coat.
Silly? I guess. But Im willing to pretend that Jane Egland is young and beautiful instead of
a three-hundred-pound cow because she has the voice of Euterpe.
Euterpe?
The muse of music. We join the stream of exiting, satiated listeners. Downstairs we
flow out into the cold. I march us up Wacker Drive a bit and manage to snare a cab after only
a few minutes. Im about to give the cabbie Charisses address when she says, Henry, lets
go have coffee. I dont want to go home yet. I tell the cabbie to take us to Dons Coffee
Club, which is on Jarvis, at the northern edge of the city. Charisse chats about the singing,
which was sublime; about the sets, which we both agree were not inspired; about the moral
difficulties of enjoying Wagner when you know he was an anti-Semitic asshole whose
biggest fan was Hitler. When we get to Dons, the joint is jumping; Don is holding court in
an orange Hawaiian shirt and I wave to him. We find a small table in the back. Charisse
orders cherry pie a la mode and coffee, and I order my usual peanut butter and jelly sandwich
and coffee. Perry Como is crooning from the stereo and theres a haze of cigarette smoke
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
315
drifting over the dinette sets and garage sale paintings. Charisse leans her head on her hand
and sighs.
This is so great. I feel like sometimes I forget what it was like to be a grown-up.
You guys dont go out much?
Charisse mushes her ice cream around with her fork, laughs. Joe does this. He says it
tastes better if its mushy. God, Im picking up their bad habits instead of them learning my
good ones. She eats a bite of pie. To answer your question, we do go out, but its almost
always to political stuff. Gomez is thinking about running for alderman.
I swallow my coffee the wrong way and start to cough. When I can talk again I say,
Youre joking. Isnt that going over to the dark side? Gomez is always slamming the city
administration.
Charisse gives me a wry look. Hes decided to change the system from within. Hes
burned out on horrible child abuse cases. I think hes convinced himself that he could
actually improve things if he had some clout.
Maybe hes right.
Charisse shakes her head. I liked it better when we were young anarchist revolutionaries.
Id rather blow things up than kiss ass.
I smile. I never realized that you were more radical than Gomez.
Oh, yeah. Actually, its just that Im not as patient as Gomez. I want action.
Gomez is patient?
Oh, sure. I mean, look at the whole thing with Clare Charisse abruptly stops, looks at
me.
What whole thing? I realize as I ask the question that this is why we are here, that
Charisse has been waiting to talk about this. I wonder what she knows that I dont know. I
wonder if I want to know what Charisse knows. I dont think I want to know anything.
Charisse looks away, and then back at me. She looks down at her coffee, puts her hands
around the cup. Well, I thought you knew, but, like Gomez is in love with Clare.
Yes. Im not helping her out with this.
Charisse is tracing the grain of the tables veneer with her finger. So.. .Clare has been
telling him to take a hike, and he thinks that if he just hangs in there long enough, something
will happen, and hell end up with her.
Something will happen...?
To you. Charisse meets my eyes.
I feel ill. Excuse me I say to her. I get up and make my way to the tiny Marilyn
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
316
Monroe-plastered bathroom. I splash my face with cold water. I lean against the wall with
my eyes closed. When it becomes obvious that Im not going anywhere I walk back into the
cafe and sit down. Sorry. You were saying?
Charisse looks scared and small. Henry, she says quietly. Tell me.
Tell you what, Charisse?
Tell me you arent going anywhere. Tell me Clare doesnt want Gomez. Tell me
everythings going to work out. Or tell me its all shit, I dont knowjust tell me what
happens! Her voice shakes. She puts her hand on my arm, and I force myself not to pull
away.
Youll be fine, Charisse. Itll be okay. She stares at me, not believing and wanting to
believe. I lean back in my chair. He wont leave you.
She sighs. And you?
I am silent. Charisse stares at me, and then she bows her head. Lets go home, she says,
finally, and we do.
Sunday, June 12, 2005 (Clare is 34, Henry is 41)
CLARE: Its a sunny Sunday afternoon, and I walk into the kitchen to find Henry standing by
the window staring out at the backyard. He beckons me over. I stand beside him and look
out. Alba is playing in the yard with an older girl. The girl is about seven. She has long dark
hair and she is barefoot. She wears a dirty T-shirt with the Cubs logo on it. They are both
sitting on the ground, facing each other. The girl has her back to us. Alba is smiling at her
and gesturing with her hands as though she is flying. The girl shakes her head and laughs.
I look at Henry. Who is that?
Thats Alba.
Yes, but whos with her?
Henry smiles, but his eyebrows pull together so that the smile seems worried. Clare,
thats Alba when shes older. Shes time traveling.
My God. I stare at the girl. She swivels and points at the house, and I see a quick profile
and then she turns away again. Should we go out there?
No, shes fine. If they want to come in here they will.
Id love to meet her....
Better not Henry begins, but as he speaks the two Albas jump up and come racing
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
317
toward the back door, hand in hand. They burst into the kitchen laughing. Mama, Mama,
says my Alba, three-year-old Alba, pointing, look! A big girl Alba!
The other Alba grins and says, Hi, Mama  and I am smiling and I say, Hello, Alba,
when she turns and sees Henry and cries out, Daddy! and runs to him, throws her arms
around him, and starts to cry. Henry glances at me, bends over Alba, rocking her, and
whispers something in her ear.
HENRY: Clare is white-faced; she stands watching us, holding small Albas hand, Alba who
stands watching open-mouthed as her older self clings to me, weeping. I lean down to Alba,
whisper in her ear:  Dont tell Mama I died, okay? She looks up at me, tears clinging to her
long lashes, lips quivering, and nods. Clare is holding a tissue, telling Alba to blow her nose,
hugging her. Alba allows herself to be led off to wash her face. Small Alba, present Alba,
wraps herself around my leg. Why, Daddy? Why is she sad? Fortunately I dont have to
answer because Clare and Alba have returned; Alba is wearing one of Clares T-shirts and a
pair of my cutoffs. Clare says, Hey, everybody. Why dont we go get an ice cream? Both
Albas smile; small Alba dances around us yelling I scream, you scream, I scream, you
scream... We pile into the car, Clare driving, three-year-old Alba in the front seat and sevenyear-old
Alba in the backseat with me. She leans against me; I put my arm around her.
Nobody says a word except little Alba, who says, Look, Alba, a doggie! Look, Alba, look,
Alba... until her older self says, Yeah, Alba, I see. Clare drives us to Zephyr; we settle
into a blue glitter vinyl booth and order two banana splits, a chocolate malt, and a soft-serve
vanilla cone with sprinkles, The girls suck down their banana splits like vacuum cleaners;
Clare and I toy with our ice cream, not looking at each other. Clare says, Alba, whats going
on, in your present?
Alba darts a look at me. Not much, she says. Gramps is teaching me Saint-Saens
second violin concerto.
Youre in a play, at school, I prompt.
I am? she says. Not yet, I guess.
Oh, sorry, I say. I guess thats not till next year. It goes on like this. We make halting
conversation, working around what we know, what we must protect Clare and small Alba
from knowing. After a while older Alba puts her head in her arms on the table. Tired?
Clare asks her. She nods. Wed better go, I tell Clare. We pay, and I pick Alba up; shes
limp, almost asleep in my arms. Clare scoops up little Alba, whos hyper from all the sugar.
Back in the car, as were cruising up Lincoln Avenue, Alba vanishes. Shes gone back  I
say to Clare. She holds my eyes in the rearview mirror for a few moments. Back where,
Daddy? asks Alba. Back where?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
318
Later:
CLARE: Ive finally managed to get Alba to take a nap. Henry is sitting on our bed, drinking
Scotch and staring out the window at some squirrels chasing each other around the grape
arbor. I walk over and sit down next to him. Hey I say. Henry looks at me, puts his arm
around me, pulls me to him. Hey he says.
Are you going to tell me what that was all about? I ask him.
Henry puts down his drink and starts to undo the buttons on my shirt. Can I get away
with not telling you?
No. I unbuckle his belt and open the button of his jeans.
Are you sure? Hes kissing my neck.
Yes. I slide his zipper down, run my hand under his shirt, over his stomach.
Because you dont really want to know. Henry breathes into my ear and runs his tongue
around the rim. I shiver. He takes off my shirt, undoes the clasp of my bra. My breasts fall
loose and I lie back, watching Henry stripping off his jeans and underwear and shirt. He
climbs onto the bed and I say, Socks.
Oh, yeah. He takes off his socks. We look at each other.
Youre just trying to distract me  I say.
Henry caresses my stomach. Im trying to distract myself. If I also manage to distract
you, thats a bonus.
You have to tell me.
No, I dont. He cups my breasts in his hands, runs his thumbs over my nipples.
Ill imagine the worst.
Go ahead. I raise my hips and Henry pulls off my jeans and my underwear. He straddles
me, leans over me, kisses me. Oh, God, I think, what can it be? What is the worst? I close my
eyes. A memory: the Meadow, a cold day in my childhood, running over dead grass, there
was a noise, he called my name
Clare? Henry is biting my lips, gently. Where are you?
1984.
Henry pauses and says, Why?
I think thats where it happens.
Where what happens?
Whatever it is youre afraid to tell me.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
319
Henry rolls off of me and we are lying side by side. Tell me about it, he says.
It was early. A day in the fall. Daddy and Mark were out deer hunting. I woke up; I
thought I heard you calling me, and I ran out into the meadow, and you were there, and you
and Daddy and Mark were all looking at something, but Daddy made me go back to the
house, so I never saw what you were looking at.
Oh?
I went back there later in the day. There was a place in the grass all soaked in blood.
Henry says nothing. He presses his lips together. I wrap my arms around him, hold him
tightly. I say, The worst
Hush, Clare.
But
Shh. Outside it is still a golden afternoon. Inside we are cold, and we cling together for
warmth. Alba, in her bed, sleeps, and dreams of ice cream, dreams the small contented
dreams of three, while another Alba, somewhere in the future, dreams of wrapping her arms
around her father, and wakes up to find.. .what?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
320
THE EPISODE OF THE MONROE STREET
PARKING GARAGE
Monday, January 7, 2006 (Clare is 34, Henry is 42)
CLARE: We are sleeping deep early morning winter sleep when the phone rings. I snap into
wakefulness, my heart surging and realize Henry is there beside me. He reaches over me and
picks up the phone. I glance at the clock; its 4:32 a.m. Lo says Henry. He listens for a
long minute. I am wide awake now. Henry is expressionless. Okay. Stay there. Well leave
right now. He leans over and replaces the receiver.
Who was it?
Me. It was me. Im down in the Monroe Street Parking Garage, no clothes, fifteen
degrees below zero. God, I hope the car starts.
We jump out of bed and throw on yesterdays clothes. Henry is booted and has his coat on
before Im in my jeans and he runs out to start the car. I stuff Henrys shirt and long
underwear and jeans and socks and boots and extra coat and mittens and a blanket into a
shopping bag, wake Alba and stuff her into her coat and boots, fly into my coat and out the
door. I pull out of the garage before the car is warmed up and it dies. I restart it, we sit for a
minute and I try again. It snowed six inches yesterday and Ainslie is rutted with ice. Alba is
whining in her car seat and Henry shushes her. When we get to Lawrence I speed up and in
ten minutes we are on the Drive; theres no one out at this hour. The Hondas heater purrs.
Over the lake the sky is becoming lighter. Everything is blue and orange, brittle in the
extreme cold. As we sail down Lake Shore Drive I have a strong deja vu: the cold, the lake in
dreamy silence, the sodium glow of the streetlights: Ive been here before, been here before.
Im deeply enmeshed in this moment and it stretches on, carrying me away from the
strangeness of the thing into awareness of the duplicity of now; although we are speeding
through this winter cityscape time stands immobile. We pass Irving, Belmont, Fullerton,
LaSalle: I exit at Michigan. We fly down the deserted corridor of expensive shops, Oak
Street, Chicago, Randolph, Monroe, and now we are diving down into the subterranean
concrete world of the parking garage. I take the ticket the ghostly female machine voice
offers me. Drive to the northwest end, says Henry. The pay phone by the security
station. I follow his instructions. The deja vu is gone. I feel as though Ive been abandoned
by a protective angel. The garage is virtually empty. I speed across acres of yellow lines to
the pay phone: the receiver dangles from its cord. No Henry.
Maybe you got back to the present?
But maybe not... Henry is confused, and so am I. We get out of the car. Its cold down
here. My breath condenses and vanishes. I dont feel as though we should leave, but I dont
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
321
have any idea what might have happened. I walk over to the security station and peer in the
window. No guard. The video monitors show empty concrete. Shit. Where would I go?
Lets drive around. We get back into the car and cruise slowly through the vast pillared
chambers of vacant space, past signs directing us to Go Slow, More Parking, Remember
Your Cars Location. No Henry anywhere. We look at each other in defeat.
When were you coming from?
I didnt say
We drive home in silence. Alba is sleeping. Henry stares out the window. The sky is
cloudless and pink in the east, and there are more cars out now, early commuters. As we wait
for the stoplight at Ohio Street I hear seagulls squawking. The streets are dark with salt and
water. The city is soft, white, obscured by snow. Everything is beautiful. I am detached, I am
a movie. We are seemingly unscathed, but sooner or later there will be hell to pay.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
322
BIRTHDAY
Thursday, June 15, 2006 (Clare is 35)
CLARE: Tomorrow is Henrys birthday. Im in Vintage Vinyl, trying to find an album he will
love that he doesnt already have. I was kind of counting on asking Vaughn, the owner of the
shop, for help, because Henrys been coming here for years. But theres a high school kid
behind the counter. Hes wearing a Seven Dead Arson T-shirt and probably wasnt even born
when most of the stuff in the shop was being recorded. I flip through the bins. Sex Pistols,
Patti Smith, Supertramp, Matthew Sweet. Phish, Pixies, Pogues, Pretenders. B-52s, Kate
Bush, Buzzcocks. Echo and the Bunnymen. The Art of Noise. The Nails. The Clash, The
Cramps, The Cure. Television. I pause over an obscure Velvet Underground retread, trying
to remember if Ive seen it lying around the house, but on closer scrutiny I realize its just a
mishmash of stuff Henry has on other albums. Dazzling Killmen, Dead Kennedys. Vaughn
comes in carrying a huge box, heaves it behind the counter, and goes back out. He does this a
few more times, and then he and the kid start to unpack the boxes, piling LPs onto the
counter, exclaiming over various things Ive never heard of. I walk over to Vaughn and
mutely fan three LPs before him. Hi, Clare, he says, grinning hugely. Hows it going?
Hi, Vaughn. Tomorrows Henrys birthday. Help.
He eyeballs my selections. Hes already got those two, he says nodding at Lilliput and
the Breeders, and thats really awful, indicating the Plasmatics. Great cover, though,
huh?
Yeah. Do you have anything in that box he might like?
Nah, this is all fifties. Some old lady died. You might like this, I just got this yesterday.
He pulls a Golden Palominos compilation out of the New Arrivals bin. Theres a couple new
things on it, so I take it. Suddenly Vaughn grins at me. Ive got something really oddball for
youIve been saving it for Henry. He steps behind the counter and fishes around in the
depths for a minute. Here. Vaughn hands me an LP in a blank white jacket. I slide the
record out and read the label:  Annette Lyn Robinson, Paris Opera, May 13, 1968, Lulu. I
look at Vaughn, questioningly. Yeah, not his usual thing, huh? Its a bootleg of a concert; it
doesnt officially exist. He asked me to keep an eye out for her stuff a while back, but its not
my usual thing, either, so I found it and then I kept forgetting to tell him. I listened to it; its
really nice. Good sound quality.
Thank you, I whisper.
Youre welcome. Hey, whats the big deal?
Shes Henrys mother.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
323
Vaughn raises his eyebrows and his forehead scrunches up comically. No kidding?
Yeah...he looks like her. Huh, thats interesting. Youd think he would have mentioned it.
He doesnt talk about her much. She died when he was little. In a car accident.
Oh. Thats right, I sort of remember that. Well, can I find anything else for you?
No, thats it. I pay Vaughn and leave, hugging the voice of Henrys mother to me as I
walk down Davis Street in an ecstasy of anticipation.
Friday, June 16, 2006 (Henry is 43, Clare is 35)
HENRY: Its my forty-third birthday. My eyes pop open at 6:46 a.m. even though I have the
day off from work, and I cant get back to sleep. I look over at Clare and shes utterly
abandoned to slumber, arms cast apart and hair fanned over her pillow willy-nilly. She looks
beautiful, even with creases from the pillowcase across her cheeks. I get out of bed carefully,
go to the kitchen, and start the coffee. In the bathroom I run the water for a while, waiting for
it to get hot. We should get a plumber in here, but we never get around to it. Back in the
kitchen I pour a cup of coffee, carry it to the bathroom, and balance it on the sink. I lather my
face, and start to shave. Ordinarily, I am expert at shaving without actually looking at myself,
but today, in honor of my birthday, I take inventory.
My hair has gone almost white; theres a bit of black left at the temples and my eyebrows
are still completely black. Ive grown it out some, not as long as I used to wear it before I
met Clare, but not short, either. My skin is wind-roughened and there are creases at the edges
of my eyes and across my forehead and lines that run from my nostrils to the corners of my
mouth. My face is too thin. All of me is too thin. Not Auschwitz thin, but not normal thin,
either. Early stages of cancer thin, perhaps. Heroin addict thin. I dont want to think about it,
so I continue shaving. I rinse off my face, apply aftershave, step back, and survey the results.
At the library yesterday someone remembered that its my birthday and so Roberto,
Isabelle, Matt, Catherine, and Amelia gathered me up and took me to Beau Thai for lunch. I
know theres been some talk at work about my health, about why I have suddenly lost so
much weight and the fact that I have recently aged rapidly. Everyone was extra nice, the way
people are to AIDS victims and chemotherapy patients. I almost long for someone to just ask
me, so I can lie to them and get it over with. But instead we joked around and ate Pad Thai
and Prik King, Cashew Chicken and Pad Seeuw. Amelia gave me a pound of killer
Colombian coffee beans. Catherine, Matt, Roberto and Isabelle splurged and got me the
Getty facsimile of the Mira Calligraphiae Monumenta, which I have been lusting after in the
Newberry bookstore for ages. I looked up at them, heartstruck, and I realized that my coworkers
think I am dying. You guys... I said, and I couldnt think how to go on, so I didnt.
Its not often that words fail me.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
324
Clare gets up, Alba wakes up. We all get dressed, and pack the car. Were going to
Brookfield Zoo with Gomez and Charisse and their kids. We spend the day ambling around,
looking at monkeys and flamingoes, polar bears and otters. Alba likes the big cats best. Rosa
holds Albas hand and tells her about dinosaurs. Gomez does a great impression of a chimp,
and Max and Joe rampage around, pretending to be elephants and playing hand-held video
games. Charisse and Clare and I stroll aimlessly, talking about nothing, soaking in the
sunlight. At four oclock the kids are all tired and cranky and we pack them back in the cars,
promise to do it again soon, and go home.
The baby-sitter arrives promptly at seven. Clare bribes and threatens Alba to be good, and
we escape. We are dressed to the nines, at Clares insistence, and as we sail south on Lake
Shore Drive I realize that I dont know where were going. Youll see, says Clare. Its not
a surprise party, is it? I ask apprehensively. No, she assures me. Clare exits the Drive at
Roosevelt and threads her way through Pilsen, a Hispanic neighborhood just south of
downtown. Groups of kids are playing in the streets, and we weave around them and finally
park near 20th and Racine. Clare leads me to a run-down two-flat and rings the bell at the
gate. We are buzzed in, and we make our way through the trash-littered yard and up
precarious stairs. Clare knocks on one of the doors and it is opened by Lourdes, a friend of
Clares from art school. Lourdes smiles and beckons us inside, and as we step in I see that
the apartment has been transformed into a restaurant with only one table. Beautiful smells are
wafting around, and the table is laid with white damask, china, candles. A record player
stands on a heavy carved sideboard. In the living room are cages full of birds: parrots,
canaries, tiny lovebirds. Lourdes kisses my cheek and says, Happy birthday, Henry, and a
familiar voice says, Yeah, happy birthday! I stick my head into the kitchen and theres
Nell. Shes stirring something in a saucepan and she doesnt stop even when I wrap my arms
around her and lift her slightly off the ground. Whooee! she says. You been eatin your
Wheaties! Clare hugs Nell and they smile at each other. He looks pretty surprised, Nell
says, and Clare just smiles even more broadly. Go on and sit down  Nell commands.
Dinner is ready.
We sit facing each other at the table. Lourdes brings small plates of exquisitely arranged
antipasti: transparent prociutto with pale yellow melon, mussels that are mild and smoky,
slender strips of carrot and beet that taste of fennel and olive oil. In the candlelight Clares
skin is warm and her eyes are shadowed. The pearls shes wearing delineate her collar bones
and the pale smooth area above her breasts; they rise and fall with her breath. Clare catches
me staring at her and smiles and looks away. I look down and realize that I have finished
eating my mussels and am sitting there holding a tiny fork in the air like an idiot. I put it
down and Lourdes removes our plates and brings the next course.
We eat Nells beautiful rare tuna, braised with a sauce of tomatoes, apples, and basil. We
eat small salads full of radicchio and orange peppers and we eat little brown olives that
remind me of a meal I ate with my mother in a hotel in Athens when I was very young. We
drink Sauvignon Blanc, toasting each other repeatedly. (To olives! To baby-sitters! To
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
325
Nell!) Nell emerges from the kitchen carrying a small flat white cake that blazes with
candles. Clare, Nell, and Lourdes sing Happy Birthday to me. I make a wish and blow out
the candles in one breath. That means youll get your wish, says Nell, but mine is not a
wish that can be granted. The birds talk to each other in strange voices as we all eat cake and
then Lourdes and Nell vanish back into the kitchen. Clare says, I got you a present. Close
your eyes. I close my eyes. I hear Clare push her chair back from the table. She walks
across the room. Then there is the noise of a needle hitting vinyl...a hiss...violins...a pure
soprano piercing like sharp rain through the clamor of the orchestra...my mothers voice,
singing Lulu. I open my eyes. Clare sits across the table from me, smiling. I stand up and pull
her from her chair, embrace her. Amazing, I say, and then I cant continue so I kiss her.
Much later, after we have said goodbye to Nell and Lourdes with many teary expressions
of gratitude, after we have made our way home and paid the baby-sitter, after we have made
love in a daze of exhausted pleasure, we lie in bed on the verge of sleep, and Clare says,
Was it a good birthday?
Perfect, I say. The best.
Do you ever wish you could stop time? Clare asks. I wouldnt mind staying here
forever.
Mmm, I say, rolling onto my stomach. As I slide into sleep Clare says, I feel like were
at the top of a roller coaster, but then I am asleep and I forget to ask her, in the morning,
what she means.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
326
AN UNPLEASANT SCENE
Wednesday, June 28, 2006 (Henry is 43, and 43)
HENRY: I come to in the dark, on a cold concrete floor. I try to sit up, but I get dizzy and I lie
down again. My head is aching. I explore with my hands; theres a big swollen area just
behind my left ear. As my eyes adjust, I see the faint outlines of stairs, and Exit signs, and far
above me a lone fluorescent bulb emitting cold light. All around me is the criss-crossed steel
pattern of the Cage. Im at the Newberry, after hours, inside the Cage.
Dont panic I say to myself out loud. Its okay. Its okay. Its okay. I stop when I
realize that Im not listening to myself. I manage to get to my feet. Im shivering. I wonder
how long I have to wait. I wonder what my co-workers will say when they see me. Because
this is it. Im about to be revealed as the tenuous freak of nature that I really am. I have not
been looking forward to this, to say the least.
I try pacing back and forth to keep warm, but this makes my head throb. I give it up, sit
down in the middle of the floor of the Cage and make myself as compact as possible. Hours
go by. I replay this whole incident in my head, rehearsing my lines, considering all the ways
it could have gone better, or worse. Finally I get tired of that and play records for myself in
my head. Thats Entertainment by the Jam, Pills and Soap by Elvis Costello, Perfect Day by
Lou Reed. Im trying to remember all the words to the Gang of Fours I Love a Man in a
Uniform when the lights blink on. Of course its Kevin the Security Nazi, opening the
library. Kevin is the last person on the entire planet I would want to encounter while naked
and trapped in the Cage, so naturally he spots me as soon as he walks in. I am curled up on
the floor, playing possum.
Whos there? Kevin says, louder than necessary. I imagine Kevin standing there, pasty
and hung over in the dank light of the stairwell. His voice bounces around, echoing off the
concrete. Kevin walks down the stairs and stands at the bottom, about ten feet away from me.
Howd you get in there? He walks around the Cage. I continue to pretend to be
unconscious. Since I cant explain, I might as well not be bothered. My God, its
DeTamble, I can feel him standing there, gaping. Finally he remembers his radio. Ah, tenfour,
hey, Roy. Unintelligible static. Ah, yeah, Roy its Kevin, ah, could you come on
down to A46? Yeah, at the bottom. Squawks. Just come on down here. He turns the radio
off. Lord, DeTamble, I dont know what you think youre trying to prove, but you sure have
done it now. I hear him moving around. His shoes squeak and he makes a soft grunting
noise. I imagine he must be sitting on the stairs. After a few minutes a door opens upstairs
and Roy comes down. Roy is my favorite security guy. Hes a huge African-American
gentleman who always has a beautiful smile on his face. Hes the King of the Main Desk,
and Im always glad to arrive at work and bask in his magnificent good cheer. Whoa, Roy
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
327
says. What have we here?
Its DeTamble. I cant figure out how he got in there.
DeTamble? My my. That boy sure has a thing for airing out his john-son. I ever tell you
bout the time I found him running around the third-floor Link in his altogether?
Yeah, you did.
Well, I guess we got to get him out of there.
Hes not moving.
Well, hes breathing. You think hes hurt? Maybe we should call an ambulance.
Were gonna need the fire department, cut him out with those Jaws of Life things they
use on wrecks. Kevin sounds excited. I dont want the fire department or paramedics. I
groan and sit up.
Good morning, Mr. DeTamble, Roy croons. Youre here a bit early, arent you?
Just a bit, I agree, pulling my knees to my chin. Im so cold my teeth hurt from being
clenched. I contemplate Kevin and Roy, and they return my gaze. I dont suppose I could
bribe you gentlemen?
They exchange glances. Depends, Kevin says, on what you have in mind. We cant
keep our mouths shut about this because we cant get you out by ourselves.
No, no, I wouldnt expect that. They look relieved, Listen. I will give each of you one
hundred dollars if you will do two things for me. The first thing is, I would like one of you to
go out and get me a cup of coffee.
Roys face breaks into his patented King of the Main Desk smile. Hell, Mr. DeTamble,
Ill do that for free. Course, I dont know how youre gonna drink it,
Bring a straw. And dont get it from the machines in the lounge. Go out and get real
coffee. Cream, no sugar.
Will do, says Roy.
Whats the second thing? asks Kevin.
I want you to go up to Special Collections and grab some clothes out of my desk, lower
right-hand drawer. Bonus points if you can do it without anyone noticing what youre up to.
No sweat, Kevin says, and I wonder why I ever disliked the man.
Better lock off this stairwell, Roy says to Kevin, who nods and walks off to do it. Roy
stands at the side of the Cage and looks at me with pity. So, howd you get yourself in
there?
I shrug. I dont have a really good answer for that.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
328
Roy smiles, shakes his head. Well, think about it and Ill go get you that cup of coffee.
About twenty minutes pass. Finally, I hear a door being unlocked and Kevin comes down
the stairs, followed by Matt and Roberto. Kevin catches my eye and shrugs as though to say,
I tried. He feeds my shirt through the mesh of the Cage, and I put it on while Roberto stands
regarding me coldly with his arms crossed. The pants are a little bulky and it takes some
effort to get them into the Cage. Matt is sitting on the stairs with a doubtful expression. I hear
the door opening again. Its Roy, bringing coffee and a sweet roll. He places a straw in my
coffee and sets it on the floor next to the roll. I have to drag my eyes away from it to look at
Roberto, who turns to Roy and Kevin and asks, May we have some privacy?
Certainly, Dr. Calle. The security guards walk upstairs and out the first-floor door. Now
I am alone, trapped, and bereft of an explanation, before Roberto, whom I revere and whom I
have lied to repeatedly. Now there is only the truth, which is more outrageous than any of my
lies.
All right, Henry, says Roberto. Lets have it.
HENRY: Its a perfect September morning. Im a little late to work because of Alba (she
refused to get dressed) and the El (it refused to come) but not terribly late, by my standards,
anyway. When I sign in at the Main Desk theres no Roy, its Marsha. I say, Hey Marsha,
wheres Roy? and she says, Oh, hes attending to some business. I say, Oh  and take the
elevator to the fourth floor. When I walk into Special Collections Isabelle says, Youre
late, and I say, But not very. I walk into my office and Matt is standing at my window,
looking out over the park.
Hi, Matt, I say, and Matt jumps a mile.
Henry! he says, going white. How did you get out of the Cage?
I set my knapsack on my desk and stare at him. The Cage?
YouI just came from downstairsyou were trapped in the Cage, and Roberto is down
thereyou told me to come up here and wait, but you didnt say for what
My god. I sit down on the desk. Oh, my god. Matt sits down in my chair and looks up
at me. Look, I can explain...  I begin.
You can?
Sure. I think about it. Iyou seeoh, fuck,
Its something really weird, isnt it, Henry?
Yeah. Yeah, it is. We stare at each other. Look, Matt.. .lets go downstairs and see
whats going on, and Ill explain to you and Roberto together, okay?
Okay. We stand up, and we go downstairs.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
329
As we walk down the east corridor I see Roy loitering near the entrance to the stairs. He
starts when he sees me, and just as hes about to ask me the obvious, I hear Catherine say,
Hi, boys, whats up? as she breezes past us and tries to open the door to the stairs. Hey,
Roy, how come no can open?
Hum, well, Ms. Mead, Roy glances at me, weve been having a problem with, uh...
Its okay, Roy, I say. Come on, Catherine. Roy, would you mind staying up here? He
nods, and lets us into the stairwell.
As we step inside I hear Roberto say, Listen, I do not appreciate you sitting in there
telling me science fiction. If I wanted science fiction I would borrow some from Amelia.
Hes sitting on the bottom stairs and as we come down behind him he turns to see who it is.
Hi, Roberto, I say softly. Catherine says, Oh my god. Oh my god. Roberto stands up
and loses his balance and Matt reaches over and steadies him. I look over at the Cage, and
there I am. Im sitting on the floor, wearing my white shirt and khakis and hugging my knees
to my chest, obviously freezing and hungry. Theres a cup of coffee sitting outside the Cage.
Roberto and Matt and Catherine watch us silently.
When are you from? I ask.
August, 2006. I pick up the coffee, hold it at chin level, poke the straw through the side
of the Cage. He sucks it down. You want this sweet roll? He does. I break it into three
parts and push it in. I feel like Im at the zoo. Youre hurt, I say. I hit my head on
something, he says. How much longer are you going to be here?
Another half hour or so. He gestures to Roberto. You see?
What is going on? Catherine asks.
I consult my self. You want to explain?
Im tired. Go ahead.
So I explain. I explain about being a time traveler, the practical and genetic aspects of it. I
explain about how the whole thing is really a sort of disease, and I cant control it. I explain
about Kendrick, and about how Clare and I met, and met again. I explain about causal loops,
and quantum mechanics and photons and the speed of light. I explain about how it feels to be
living outside of the time constraints most humans are subject to. I explain about the lying,
and the stealing, and the fear. I explain about trying to have a normal life. And part of
having a normal life is having a normal job, I conclude.
I wouldnt really call this a normal job, Catherine says.
I wouldnt call this a normal life, says my self, sitting inside the Cage.
I look at Roberto, who is sitting on the stairs, leaning his head against the wall. He looks
exhausted, and wistful. So, I ask him. Are you going to fire me?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
330
Roberto sighs. No. No, Henry, Im not going to fire you. He stands up carefully, and
brushes off the back of his coat with his hand. But I dont understand why you didnt tell
me all this a long time ago.
You wouldnt have believed me, says my self. You didnt believe me just now, until
you saw.
Well, yes Roberto begins, but his next words are lost in the odd noise vacuum that
sometimes accompanies my comings and goings. I turn and see a pile of clothes lying on the
floor of the Cage. I will come back later this afternoon and fish them out with a clothes
hanger. I turn back to Matt, Roberto, and Catherine. They look stunned.
Gosh, says Catherine. Its like working with Clark Kent.
I feel like Jimmy Olsen, says Matt. Ugh.
That makes you Lois Lane, Roberto teases Catherine.
No, no, Clare is Lois Lane, she replies.
Matt says, But Lois Lane was oblivious to the Clark Kent/Superman connection,
whereas Clare.
Without Clare I would have given up a long time ago, I say. I never understood why
Clark Kent was so hell bent on keeping Lois Lane in the dark.
It makes a better story, says Matt.
Does it? I dont know, I reply.
Friday, July 7, 2006 (Henry is 43)
HENRY: Im sitting in Kendricks office, listening to him explain why its not going to work.
Outside the heat is stifling, blazing hot wet wool mummification. In here its air-conditioned
enough that Im hunched gooseflesh in this chair. We are sitting across from each other in
the same chairs we always sit in. On the table is an ashtray full of cigarette filters. Kendrick
has been lighting each cigarette off the end of the previous one. Were sitting with the lights
off, and the air is heavy with smoke and cold. I want a drink. I want to scream. I want
Kendrick to stop talking so I can ask him a question. I want to stand up and walk out. But I
sit, listening.
When Kendrick stops talking the background noises of the building are suddenly
apparent.
Henry? Did you hear me?
I sit up and look at him like a schoolchild caught daydreaming. Um, no.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
331
I asked you if you understood. Why it wont work.
Um, yeah. I try to pull my head together. It wont work because my immune system is
all fucked up. And because Im old. And because there are too many genes involved.
Right. Kendrick sighs and stubs out his cigarette in the mound of stubs. Tendrils of
smoke escape and die. Im sorry. He leans back in his chair and clasps his soft pink hands
together in his lap. I think about the first time I saw him, here in this office, eight years ago.
Both of us were younger and cockier, confident in the bounty of molecular genetics, ready to
use science to confound nature. I think about holding Kendricks time-traveling mouse in my
hands, about the surge of hope I felt then, looking at my tiny white proxy. I think about the
look on Clares face when I tell her its not going to work. She never thought it would work,
though.
I clear my throat. What about Alba?
Kendrick crosses his ankles and fidgets. What about Alba?
Would it work for her?
Well never know, will we? Unless Clare changes her mind about letting me work with
Albas DNA. And we both know perfectly well that Clares terrified of gene therapy. She
looks at me like Im Josef Mengele every time I try to discuss it with her.
But if you had Albas DNA I say, you could make some mice and work on stuff for
her and when she turns eighteen if she wants she can try it.
Yes.
So even if Im fucked at least Alba might benefit someday.
Yes.
Okay, then. I stand and rub my hands together, pluck my cotton shirt away from my
body where it has been adhered by now-cold sweat. Thats what well do.
Friday, July 14, 2006 (Clare is 35, Henry is 43)
CLARE: Im in the studio making gampi tissue. Its a paper so thin and transparent you can
see through it; I plunge the su-ketta into the vat and bring it up, rolling the delicate slurry
around until it is perfectly distributed. I set it on the corner of the vat to drain, and I hear
Alba laughing, Alba running through the garden, Alba yelling, Mama! Look what Daddy
got me! She bursts through the door and clatters toward me, Henry following more sedately.
I look down to see why she is clattering and I see: ruby slippers.
Theyre just like Dorothys! Alba says, doing a little tap dance on the wooden floor.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
332
She taps her heels together three times, but she doesnt vanish. Of course, shes already
home. I laugh. Henry looks pleased with himself.
Did you make it to the post office? I ask him.
His face falls. Shit. No, I forgot. Sorry. Ill go tomorrow, first thing. Alba is twirling
around, and Henry reaches out and stops her. Dont, Alba. Youll get dizzy.
I like being dizzy.
Its not a good idea.
Alba is wearing a T-shirt and shorts. She has a Band-Aid over the skin in the crook of her
elbow. What happened to your arm? I ask her. Instead of answering she looks at Henry, so
I do, too.
Its nothing, he says. She was sucking on her skin and she gave herself a hickey.
Whats a hickey? Alba asks. Henry starts to explain but I say, Why does a hickey need
a Band-Aid?
I dunno  he says. She just wanted one.
I have a premonition. Call it the sixth sense of mothers. I walk over to Alba. Lets see.
She hugs her arm close to her, clutching it tight with her other arm. Dont take off the
Band-Aid. Itll hurt.
Ill be careful. I grip her arm firmly. She makes a whimpering noise, but I am
determined. Slowly I unbend her arm, peel off the bandage gently. Theres a small red
puncture wound in the center of a purple bruise. Alba says, Its sore, dont and I release
her. She sticks the Band-Aid back down, and watches me, waiting.
Alba, why dont you go call Kimy and see if she wants to come over for dinner? Alba
smiles and races out of the studio. In a minute the back door of the house bangs. Henry is
sitting at my drawing table, swiveling slightly back and forth in my chair. He watches me.
He waits for me to say something.
I dont believe it, I finally say. How could you?
I had to Henry says. His voice is quiet. SheI couldnt leave her without at leastI
wanted to give her a head start. So Kendrick can be working on it, working for her, just in
case. I walk over to him, squeaking in my galoshes and rubber apron, and lean against the
table. Henry tilts his head, and the light rakes his face and I see the lines that run across his
forehead, around the edges of his mouth, his eyes. He has lost more weight. His eyes are
huge in his face. Clare, I didnt tell her what it was for. You can tell her, when... its time.
I shake my head, no. Call Kendrick and tell him to stop.
No.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
333
Then I will.
Clare, dont
You can do whatever you want with your own body, Henry, but
Clare! Henry squeezes my name out through clenched teeth.
What?
Its over, okay? Im done. Kendrick says he cant do anything more.
But I pause to absorb what hes just said. But then...what happens?
Henry shakes his head. I dont know. Probably what we thought might happen...happens.
But if thats what happens, then...I cant just leave Alba without trying to help her...oh, Clare,
just let me do this for her! It may not work, she may never use itshe may love time
traveling, she may never be lost, or hungry, she may never get arrested or chased or raped or
beat up, but what if she doesnt love it? What if she wants to just be a regular girl? Clare?
Oh, Clare, dont cry... But I cant stop, I stand weeping in my yellow rubber apron, and
finally Henry stands up and puts his arms around me. Its not like we ever were exempt,
Clare, he says softly. Im just trying to make her a safety net. I can feel his ribs through
his T-shirt. Will you let me at least leave her that? I nod, and Henry kisses my forehead.
Thank you, he says, and I start to cry again.
Saturday, October 27, 1984 (Henry is 43, Clare is 13)
HENRY: I know the end, now. It goes like this: I will be sitting in the Meadow, in the early
morning, in autumn. It will be overcast, and chilly, and I will be wearing a black wool
overcoat and boots and gloves. It will be a date that is not on the List. Clare will be asleep, in
her warm twin bed. She will be thirteen years old.
In the distance, a shot will crack across the dry cold air. It is deer-hunting season.
Somewhere out there, men in bright orange garments will be sitting, waiting, shooting. Later
they will drink beer, and eat the sandwiches their wives have packed for them.
The wind will pick up, will ripple through the orchard, stripping the useless leaves from
the apple trees. The back door of Meadowlark House will slam, and two tiny figures in
fluorescent orange will emerge, carrying matchstick rifles. They will walk toward me, into
the Meadow, Philip and Mark. They will not see me, because I will be huddled in the high
grass, a dark, unmoving spot in a field of beige and dead green. About twenty yards from me
Philip and Mark will turn off the path and walk towards the woods.
They will stop and listen. They will hear it before I do: a rustling, thrashing, something
moving through the grass, something large and clumsy, a flash of white, a tail perhaps? and it
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
334
will come toward me, toward the clearing, and Mark will raise his rifle, aim carefully,
squeeze the trigger, and:
There will be a shot, and then a scream, a human scream. And then a pause. And then: 
Clare! Clare! And then nothing.
I will sit for a moment, not thinking, not breathing. Philip will be running, and then I will
be running, and Mark, and we will converge on the place:
But there will be nothing. Blood on the earth, shiny and thick. Bent dead grass. We will
stare at each other without recognition, over the empty dirt.
In her bed, Clare will hear the scream. She will hear someone calling her name, and she
will sit up, her heart jumping in her ribcage. She will run downstairs, out the door, into the
Meadow in her nightgown. When she sees the three of us she will stop, confused. Behind the
backs of her father and brother I will put my finger to my lips. As Philip walks to her I will
turn away, will stand in the shelter of the orchard and watch her shivering in her fathers
embrace, while Mark stands by, impatient and perplexed, his fifteen-year-olds stubble
gracing his chin and he will look at me, as though he is trying to remember.
And Clare will look at me, and I will wave to her, and she will walk back to her house
with her dad, and she will wave back, slender, her nightgown blowing around her like an
angels, and she will get smaller and smaller, will recede into the distance and disappear into
the house, and I will stand over a small trampled bloody patch of soil and I will know:
somewhere out there I am dying.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
335
THE EPISODE OF THE MONROE STREET
PARKING GARAGE
Monday, January 7, 2006 (Henry is 43)
HENRY: Its cold. Its very, very cold and I am lying on the ground in snow. Where am I? I
try to sit up. My feet are numb, I cant feel my feet. Im in an open space with no buildings
or trees. How long have I been here? Its night. I hear traffic. I get to my hands and knees. I
look up. Im in Grant Park. The Art Institute stands dark and closed across hundreds of feet
of blank snow. The beautiful buildings of Michigan Avenue are silent. Cars stream along
Lake Shore Drive, headlights cutting through night. Over the lake is a faint line of light;
dawn is coming. I have to get out of here. I have to get warm.
I stand up. My feet are white and stiff. I cant feel them or move them, but I begin to
walk, I stagger forward through the snow, sometimes falling, getting back up and walking, it
goes on and on, finally I am crawling. I crawl across a street. I crawl down concrete stairs
backwards, clinging to the handrail. Salt gets into the raw places on my hands and knees. I
crawl to a pay phone.
Seven rings. Eight. Nine. Lo, says my self.
Help me, I say. Im in the Monroe Street Parking Garage. Its unbelievably fucking
cold down here. Im near the guard station. Come and get me.
Okay. Stay there. Well leave right now.
I try to hang up the phone but miss. My teeth are chattering uncontrollably. I crawl to the
guard station and hammer on the door. No one is there. Inside I see video monitors, a space
heater, a jacket, a desk, a chair. I try the knob. Its locked. I have nothing to open it with. The
window is wire reinforced. I am shivering hard. There are no cars down here.
Help me! I yell. No one comes. I curl into a ball in front of the door, bring my knees to
my chin, wrap my hands around my feet. No one comes, and then, at last, at last, I am gone.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
336
FRAGMENTS
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, September 25, 26, and 27, 2006 (Clare is 35, Henry is 43)
CLARE: Henry has been gone all day. Alba and I went to McDonalds for dinner. We played
Go Fish and Crazy Eights; Alba drew a picture of a girl with long hair flying a dog. We
picked out her dress for school tomorrow. Now she is in bed. I am sitting on the front porch
trying to read Proust; reading in French is making me drowsy and I am almost asleep when
there is a crash in the living room and Henry is on the floor shivering, white and coldHelp
me, he says through chattering teeth and I run for the phone.
Later:
The Emergency Room: a scene of fluorescent limbo: old people full of ailments, mothers
with feverish small children, teenagers whose friends are having bullets removed from
various limbs, who will brag about this later to admiring girls but who are now subdued and
tired.
Later:
In a small white room: nurses lift Henry onto a bed and remove his blanket. His eyes
open, register me, and close. A blond intern looks him over. A nurse takes his temperature,
pulse. Henry is shivering, shivering so intensely it makes the bed shake, makes the nurses
arm vibrate like the Magic Fingers beds in 1970s motels. The resident looks at Henrys
pupils, ears, nose, fingers, toes, genitals. They begin to wrap him in blankets and something
metallic and aluminum foil-like. They pack his feet in cold packs. The small room is very
warm. Henrys eyes flicker open again. He is trying to say something. It sounds like my
name. I reach under the blankets and hold his icy hands in mine. I look at the nurse. We
need to warm him up, get his core temperature up, she says. Then well see.
Later:
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
337
How on earth did he get hypothermia in September? the resident asks me.
I dont know, I say. Ask him.
Later:
Its morning. Charisse and I are in the hospital cafeteria. Shes eating chocolate pudding.
Upstairs in his room Henry is sleeping. Kimy is watching him. I have two pieces of toast on
my plate; they are soggy with butter and untouched. Someone sits down next to Charisse; its
Kendrick. Good news, he says, his core temps up to ninety-seven point six. There
doesnt seem to be any brain damage.
I cant say anything. Thank you God, is all I think.
Okay, um, Ill check back later when Im finished at Rush St. Lukes, says Kendrick,
standing up.
Thank you, David, I say as hes about to walk away, and Kendrick smiles and leaves.
Later:
Dr. Murray comes in with an Indian nurse whose name tag says Sue. Sue is carrying a
large basin and a thermometer and a bucket. Whatever is about to happen, it will be low-tech.
Good morning, Mr. DeTamble, Mrs. DeTamble. Were going to rewarm your feet. Sue
sets the basin on the floor and silently disappears into the bathroom. Water runs. Dr. Murray
is very large and has a wonderful beehive hairdo that only certain very imposing and
beautiful black women can get away with. Her bulk tapers down from the hem of her white
coat into two perfect feet in alligator-skin pumps. She produces a syringe and an ampoule
from her pocket, and proceeds to draw the contents of the ampoule into the syringe.
What is that? I ask.
Morphine. This is going to hurt. His feet are pretty far gone. She gently takes Henrys
arm, which he mutely holds out to her as though she has won it from him in a poker game.
She has a delicate touch. The needle slides in and she depresses the plunger; after a moment
Henry makes a little moan of gratitude. Dr. Murray is removing the cold packs from Henrys
feet as Sue emerges with hot water. She sets it on the floor by the bed. Dr. Murray lowers the
bed, and the two of them manipulate him into a sitting position. Sue measures the
temperature of the water. She pours the water into the basin and immerses Henrys feet. He
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
338
gasps.
Any tissue thats gonna make it will turn bright red. If it doesnt look like a lobster, its a
problem.
I watch Henrys feet floating in the yellow plastic basin. They are white as snow, white as
marble, white as titanium, white as paper, white as bread, white as sheets, white as white can
be. Sue changes the water as Henrys ice feet cool it down. The thermometer shows one
hundred and six degrees. In five minutes it is ninety degrees and Sue changes it again.
Henrys feet bob like dead fish. Tears run down his cheeks and disappear under his chin. I
wipe his face. I stroke his head. I watch to see his feet turn bright red. Its like waiting for a
photograph to develop, watching for the image slowly graying into black in the tray of
chemicals. A flush of red appears at the ankles of both feet. The red spreads in splotches over
the left heel, finally some of the toes hesitantly blush. The right foot remains stubbornly
blanched. Pink appears reluctantly as far as the ball of the foot, and then goes no farther.
After an hour, Dr. Murray and Sue carefully dry Henrys feet and Sue places bits of cotton
between his toes. They put him back in bed and arrange a frame over his feet so nothing
touches them.
The following night:
Its very late at night and I am sitting by Henrys bed in Mercy Hospital, watching him
sleep. Gomez is sitting in a chair on the other side of the bed, and he is also asleep. Gomez
sleeps with his head back and his mouth open, and every now and then he makes a little
snorting noise and then turns his head.
Henry is still and silent. The IV machine beeps. At the foot of the bed a tent-like
contraption raises the blankets away from the place where his feet should be, but Henrys
feet are not there now. The frostbite ruined them. Both feet were amputated above the ankles
this morning. I cannot imagine, I am trying not to imagine, what is below the blankets.
Henrys bandaged hands are lying above the blankets and I take his hand, feeling how cool
and dry it is, how the pulse beats in the wrist, how tangible Henrys hand is in my hand.
After the surgery Dr. Murray asked me what I wanted her to do with Henrys feet. Reattach
them seemed like the correct answer, but I just shrugged and looked away.
A nurse comes in, smiles at me, and gives Henry his injection. In a few minutes he sighs,
as the drug envelopes his brain, and turns his face toward me. His eyes open so slightly, and
then he is asleep again.
I want to pray, but I cant remember any prayers, all that runs through my head is Eenymeeny
miney moe, catch a tiger by the toe, if he hollers, let him go, eeny meeny miney moe.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
339
Oh, God, please dont, please dont do this to me. But the Snark was a boojum. No. Nothing
comes. Envoyez chercher le medecin. Quavez-vous? Ilfaudra aller a Chapital. Je me suis
coupe assez fortement. Otez le bandage et laissez-moi voir. Out, cest une coupure profunde.
I dont know what time it is. Outside it is getting light. I place Henrys hand back on the
blanket. He draws it to his chest, protectively.
Gomez yawns, and stretches his arms out, cracking his knuckles. Morning, kitten, he
says, and gets up and lumbers into the bathroom. I can hear him peeing as Henry opens his
eyes.
Where am I?
Mercy. September 27, 2006 
Henry stares up at the ceiling. Then, slowly, he pushes himself up against the pillows and
stares at the foot of the bed. He leans forward, reaching with his hands under the blanket. I
close my eyes.
Henry begins to scream.
Tuesday, October 17, 2006 (Clare is 35, Henry is 43)
CLARE: Henry has been home from the hospital for a week. He spends the days in bed, curled
up, facing the window, drifting in and out of morphine-laced sleep. I try to feed him soup,
and toast, and macaroni and cheese, but he doesnt eat very much. He doesnt say much,
either. Alba hovers around, silent and anxious to please, to bring Daddy an orange, a
newspaper, her Teddy; but Henry only smiles absently and the small pile of offerings sits
unused on his nightstand. A brisk nurse named Sonia Browne comes once a day to change
the dressings and to give advice, but as soon as she vanishes into her red Volkswagen Beetle
Henry subsides into his vacant-lot persona. I help him to use the bedpan. I make him change
one pair of pajamas for another. I ask him how he feels, what he needs, and he answers
vaguely or not at all. Although Henry is right here in front of me, he has disappeared.
Im walking down the hall past the bedroom with a basket of laundry in my arms and I
see Alba through the slightly open door, standing next to Henry, who is curled up in bed. I
stop and watch her. She stands still, her arms hanging at her side, her black braids dangling
down her back, her blue turtleneck distorted from being pulled on. Morning light floods the
room, washes everything yellow.
Daddy? Alba says, softly. Henry doesnt respond. She tries again, louder. Henry turns
toward her, rolls over. Alba sits down on the bed. Henry has his eyes closed.
Daddy?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
340
Hmm?
Are you dying?
Henry opens his eyes and focuses on Alba. No.
Alba said you died.
Thats in the future, Alba. Not yet. Tell Alba she shouldnt tell you those kinds of
things. Henry runs his hand over the beard thats been growing since we left the hospital.
Alba sits with her hands folded in her lap and her knees together.
Are you going to stay in bed all the time now?
Henry pulls himself up so he is leaning against the headboard. Maybe. He is
rummaging in the drawer of the nightstand, but the painkillers are in the bathroom.
Why?
Because I feel like shit, okay?
Alba shrinks away from Henry, gets up off the bed. Okay! she says, and she is opening
the door and almost collides with me and is startled and then she silently flings her arms
around my waist and I pick her up, so heavy in my arms now. I carry her into her room and
we sit in the rocker, rocking together, Albas hot face against my neck. What can I tell you,
Alba? What can I say?
Wednesday and Thursday October 18 and 19, and Thursday, October 26, 2006 (Clare is
35, Henry is 43)
CLARE: Im standing in my studio with a roll of armature wire and a bunch of drawings. Ive
cleared off the big work table, and the drawings are neatly pinned up on the wall. Now I
stand and try to summon up the piece in my minds eye. I try to imagine it 3-D. Life size. I
snip off a length of wire and it springs away from the huge roll; I begin to shape a torso. I
weave the wire into shoulders, ribcage, and then a pelvis. I pause. Maybe the arms and legs
should be articulated? Should I make feet or not? I start to make a head and then realize that I
dont want any of this. I push it all under the table and begin again with more wire.
Like an angel. Every angel is terrifying. And yet, alas, I invoke you, almost deadly birds of
the soul... It is only the wings that I want to give him. I draw in the air with the thin metal,
looping and weaving; I measure with my arms to make a wingspan, I repeat the process,
mirror-reversed, for the second wing, comparing symmetry as though Im giving Alba a
haircut, measuring by eye, feeling out the weight, the shapes. I hinge the wings together, and
then I get up on the ladder and hang them from the ceiling. They float, air encompassed by
lines, at the level of my breasts, eight feet across, graceful, ornamental, useless.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
341
At first I imagined white, but I realize now that thats not it. I open the cabinet of
pigments and dyes. Ultramarine, Yellow Ochre, Raw Umber, Viridian, Madder Lake. No.
Here it is: Red Iron Oxide. The color of dried blood. A terrible angel wouldnt be white, or
would be whiter than any white I can make. I set the jar on the counter, along with Bone
Black. I walk to the bundles of fiber that stand, fragrant, in the far corner of the studio. Kozo
and linen; transparency and pliancy, a fiber that rattles like chattering teeth combined with
one that is soft as lips. I weigh out two pounds of kozo, tough and resilient bark that must be
cooked and beaten, broken and pounded. I heat water in the huge pot that covers two burners
on the stove. When it is boiling I feed the kozo into it, watching it darken and slowly take in
water. I measure in soda ash and cover the pot, turn on the exhaust hood. I chop a pound of
white linen into small pieces, fill the beater with water, and start it rending and tearing up the
linen into a fine white pulp. Then I make myself coffee and sit staring out the window across
the yard at the house.
At that moment:
HENRY: My mother is sitting on the foot of my bed. I dont want her to know about my feet.
I close my eyes and pretend to be asleep. Henry? she says. I know youre awake. Cmon,
buddy, rise and shine. I open my eyes. Its Kimy. Mmm. Morning.
Its 2:30 in the afternoon. You should get out of bed.
I cant get out of bed, Kimy. I dont have any feet.
You got wheelchair, she says. Come on, you need a bath, you need a shave, pee-yoo,
you smell like an old man. Kimy stands up, looking very grim. She peels the covers off of
me and I lie there like a shelled shrimp, cold and flaccid in the afternoon sunlight. Kimy
browbeats me into sitting in the wheelchair, and she wheels me to the door of the bathroom,
which is too narrow for the chair to pass.
Okay, Kimy says, standing in front of me with her hands on her hips. How we gonna
do this? Huh?
I dont know, Kimy. Im just the gimp; I dont actually work here.
What kind of word is that, gimp?
Its a highly pejorative slang word used to describe cripples.
Kimy looks at me as though I am eight and have used the word fuck in her presence (I
didnt know what it meant, I only knew it was forbidden). I think its sposed to be disabled,
Henry. She leans over and unbuttons my pajama top.
Ive got hands I say, and finish the unbuttoning myself. Kimy turns around, brusque
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
342
and grumpy, and turns on the tap, adjusts the temperature, places the plug in the drain. She
rummages in the medicine cabinet, brings out my razor, shaving soap, the beaver-hair
shaving brush. I cant figure out how to get out of the wheelchair. I decide to try sliding off
the seat; I push my ass forward, arch my back, and slither toward the floor. I wrench my left
shoulder and bang my butt as I go down, but its not too bad. In the hospital the physical
therapist, an encouraging young person named Penny Featherwight, had several techniques
for getting in and out of the chair, but they all had to do with chair/bed and chair/chair
situations. Now Im sitting on the floor and the bathtub looms like the white cliffs of Dover
above me. I look up at Kimy, eighty-two years old, and realize that Im on my own, here.
She looks at me and its all pity, that look. I think fuck it, I have to do this somehow, I cant
let Kimy look at me like that. I shrug out of my pajama bottoms, and begin to unwrap the
bandages that cover the dressings on my legs. Kimy looks at her teeth in the mirror. I stick
my arm over the side of the tub and test the bath water.
If you throw some herbs in there you can have stewed gimp for supper.
Too hot? Kimy asks.
Yeah.
Kimy adjusts the faucets and then leaves the bathroom, pushing the wheelchair out of the
doorway. I gingerly remove the dressing from my right leg. Under the wrappings the skin is
pale and cold. I put my hand at the folded-over part, the flesh that cushions the bone. I just
took a Vicodin a little while ago. I wonder if I could take another one without Clare noticing.
The bottle is probably up there in the medicine cabinet. Kimy comes back carrying one of the
kitchen chairs. She plops it down next to me. I remove the dressing from the other leg.
She did a nice job, Kimy says.
Dr. Murray? Yeah, its a big improvement, much more aerodynamic.
Kimy laughs. I send her to the kitchen for phone books. When she puts them next to the
chair I raise myself so Im sitting on them. Then I scramble onto the chair, and sort of
fall/roll into the bathtub. A huge wave of water sloshes out of the tub onto the tile. Im in the
bathtub. Hallelujah. Kimy turns off the water, and dries her legs with a towel. I submerge.
Later:
CLARE: After hours of cooking I strain the kozo and it, too, goes into the beater. The longer it
stays in the beater, the finer and more bone-like it will be. After four hours, I add retention
aid, clay, pigment. The beige pulp suddenly turns a deep dark earth red. I drain it into
buckets and pour it into the waiting vat. When I walk back to the house Kimy is in the
kitchen making the kind of tuna fish casserole that has potato chips crumbled over it.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
343
Howd it go? I ask her.
Real good. Hes in the living room. There is a trail of water between the bathroom and
the living room in Kimy-sized footprints. Henry is sleeping on the sofa with a book spread
open on his chest. Borges
Ficciones. He is shaved and I lean over him and breathe; he smells fresh, his damp gray
hair sticking up all ways. Alba is chattering to Teddy in her room. For a moment I feel as
though Ive time traveled, as though this is some stray moment from before, but then I let my
eyes travel down Henrys body to the flatnesses at the end of the blanket, and I know that I
am only here and now.
The next morning its raining. I open the door of the studio and the wire wings await me,
floating in the morning gray light. I turn on the radio; its Chopin, rolling etudes like waves
over sand. I don rubber boots, a bandanna to keep my hair out of the pulp, a rubber apron. I
hose down my favorite teak and brass mold and deckle, uncover the vat, set up a felt to couch
the paper onto. I reach down into the vat and agitate the slurry of dark red to mix the fiber
and water. Everything drips. I plunge the mold and deckle into the vat, and carefully bring it
up, level, streaming water. I set it on the corner of the vat and the water drains from it and
leaves a layer of fiber on the surface; I remove the deckle and press the mold onto the felt,
rocking it gently and as I remove it the paper remains on the felt, delicate and shiny. I cover
it with another felt, wet it, and again: I plunge the mold and deckle down, bring it up, drain it,
couch it. I lose myself in the repetition, the piano music floating over the water sloshing and
dripping and raining. When I have a post of paper and felt, I press it in the hydraulic paper
press. Then I go back to the house and eat a ham sandwich. Henry is reading. Alba is at
school.
After lunch, I stand in front of the wings with my post of freshly made paper. I am going
to cover the armature with a paper membrane. The paper is damp and dark and wants to tear
but it drapes over the wire forms like skin. I twist the paper into sinews, into cords that twist
and connect. The wings are bat wings now, the tracing of the wire is evident below the gaunt
paper surface. I dry the paper I havent used yet, heating it on sheets of steel. Then I begin to
tear it into strips, into feathers. When the wings are dry I will sew these on, one by one. I
begin to paint the strips, black and gray and red. Plumage, for the terrible angel, the deadly
bird.
A week later, in the evening:
HENRY: Clare has cajoled me into getting dressed and has enlisted Gomez to carry me out
the back door, across the yard, and into her studio. The studio is lit with candles; there are
probably a hundred of them, more, on tables and on the floor, and on the windowsills.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
344
Gomez sets me down on the studio couch, and retreats to the house. In the middle of the
studio a white sheet is suspended from the ceiling, and I turn around to see if theres a
projector, but there isnt. Clare is wearing a dark dress, and as she moves around the room
her face and hands float white and disembodied.
Want some coffee? she asks me. I havent had any since before the hospital. Sure, I
reply. She pours two cups, adds cream, and brings me one. The hot cup feels familiar and
good in my hand. I made you something, Clare says.
Feet? I could use some feet.
Wings, she says, dropping the white sheet to the floor.
The wings are huge and they float in the air, wavering in the candlelight. They are darker
than the darkness, threatening but also redolent of longing, of freedom, of rushing through
space. The feeling of standing solidly, on my own two feet, of running, running like flying.
The dreams of hovering, of flying as though gravity has been rescinded and now is allowing
me to be removed from the earth a safe distance, these dreams come back to me in the twilit
studio. Clare sits down next to me. I feel her looking at me. The wings are silent, their edges
ragged. I cannot speak. Siehe, ich lebe. Woraus? Weder Kindheit noch Zukunft! werden
weniger... Uberzahliges Dasein! entspringt reir Herzen. (Look, I am living. On what?
Neither childhood nor future/ grows any smaller.. .Superabundant being/ wells up in my
heart.)
Kiss me, Clare says, and I turn to her, white face and dark lips floating in the dark, and I
submerge, I fly, I am released: being wells up in my heart.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
345
FEET DREAMS
October/November, 2006 (Henry is 43)
HENRY: I dream that I am at the Newberry, giving a Show and Tell to some graduate
students from Columbia College. Im showing them incunabula, early printed books. I show
them the Gutenberg Fragment, Caxtons Game and Play of Chess, the Jensen Eusebius. Its
going well, they are asking good questions. I rummage around on the cart, looking for this
special book I just found in the stacks, something I never knew we had. Its in a heavy red
box. Theres no title, just the call number, CASE WING f ZX 983.D 453, stamped in gold
under the Newberry insignia. I place the box on the table and set out the pads. I open the box,
and there, pink and perfect, are my feet. They are surprisingly heavy. As I set them on the
pads the toes all wiggle, to say Hi, to show me they can still do it. I begin to speak about
them, explaining the relevance of my feet to fifteenth century Venetian printing. The students
are taking notes. One of them, a pretty blonde in a shiny sequined tank top, points at my feet,
and says, Look, theyre all white! And its true, the skin has gone dead white, the feet are
lifeless and putrid. I sadly make a note to myself to send them up to Conservation first thing
tomorrow.
In my dream I am running. Everything is fine. I run along the lake, from Oak Street
Beach, heading north. I feel my heart pumping, my lungs smoothly rising and falling. I am
moving right along. What a relief, I think. I was afraid Id never run again, but here I am,
running. Its great.
But things begin to go wrong. Parts of my body are falling off. First my left arm goes. I
stop and pick it up off the sand and brush it off and put it back on, but it isnt very securely
attached and it comes off again after only half a mile. So I carry it in my other arm, thinking
maybe when I get it back home I can attach it more tightly. But then the other arm goes, and
I have no arms at all to even pick up the arms Ive lost. So I continue running. Its not too
bad; it doesnt hurt. Soon I realize that my cock has dislodged and fallen into the right leg of
my sweatpants, where it is banging around in an annoying manner, trapped by the elastic at
the bottom. But I cant do anything about it, so I ignore it. And then I can feel that my feet
are all broken up like pavement inside my shoes, and then both of my feet break off at the
ankles and I fall face-first onto the path. I know that if I stay there I will be trampled by other
runners, so I begin to roll. I roll and roll until I roll into the lake, and the waves roll me
under, and I wake up gasping.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
346
I dream that I am in a ballet. I am the star ballerina, I am in my dressing room being
swathed in pink tulle by Barbara, who was my moms dresser. Barbara is a tough cookie, so
even though my feet hurt like hell I dont complain as she tenderly encases the stumps in
long pink satin toe shoes. When she finishes I stagger up from my chair and cry out. Dont
be a sissy, says Barbara, but then she relents and gives me a shot of morphine. Uncle Ish
appears at the door of the dressing room and we hurry down endless backstage hallways. I
know that my feet hurt even though I cannot see them or feel them. We rush on, and
suddenly I am in the wings and looking onto the stage I realize that the ballet is The
Nutcracker, and I am the Sugar Plum Fairy. For some reason this really bugs me. This isnt
what I was expecting. But someone gives me a little shove, and I totter on stage. And I
dance. I am blinded by the lights, I dance without thinking, without knowing the steps, in an
ecstasy of pain. Finally I fall to my knees, sobbing, and the audience rises to their feet, and
applauds.
Friday, November 3, 2006 (Clare is 35, Henry is 43)
CLARE: Henry holds up an onion and looks at me gravely and says,  This...is an onion.
I nod. Yes. Ive read about them.
He raises one eyebrow. Very good. Now, to peel an onion, you take a sharp knife, lay the
aforementioned onion sideways on a cutting board, and remove each end, like so. Then you
can peel the onion, like so. Okay. Now, slice it into cross-sections. If youre making onion
rings, you just pull apart each slice, but if youre making soup or spaghetti sauce or
something you dice it, like this..
Henry has decided to teach me to cook. All the kitchen counters and cabinets are too high
for him in his wheelchair. We sit at the kitchen table, surrounded by bowls and knives and
cans of tomato sauce. Henry pushes the cutting board and knife across the table to me, and I
stand up and awkwardly dice the onion. Henry watches patiently. Okay, great. Now, green
peppers: you run the knife around here, then pull out the stem...
We make marinara sauce, pesto, lasagna. Another day its chocolate chip cookies,
brownies, creme brulee. Alba is in heaven. More dessert, she begs. We poach eggs and
salmon, make pizza from scratch. I have to admit that its kind of fun. But Im terrified the
first night I cook dinner by myself. Im standing in the kitchen surrounded by pots and pans,
the asparagus is overcooked and I burn myself taking the monkfish out of the oven. I put
everything on plates and bring it into the dining room where Henry and Alba are sitting at
their places. Henry smiles, encouragingly. I sit down; Henry raises his glass of milk in the
air: To the new cook! Alba clinks her cup against his, and we begin to eat. I sneak glances
at Henry, eating. And as Im eating, I realize that everything tastes fine. Its good, Mama!
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
347
Alba says, and Henry nods. Its terrific, Clare, Henry says, and we stare at each other and I
think, Dont leave me.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
348
WHAT GOES AROUND COMES AROUND
Monday, December 18, 2006/Sunday, January 2, 1994 (Henry is 43)
HENRY: I wake up in the middle of the night with a thousand razor-toothed insects gnawing
on my legs and before I can even shake a Vicodin out of the bottle I am falling. I double up, I
am on the floor but its not our floor, its some other floor, some other night. Where am I?
Pain makes everything seem shimmery, but its dark and theres something about the smell,
what does it remind me of? Bleach. Sweat. Perfume, so familiarbut it couldnt be
Footsteps walking up stairs, voices, a key unlocking several locks (where can I hide?) the
door opens, Im crawling across the floor as the light snaps on and explodes in my head like
a flashbulb and a woman whispers, Oh my god. Im thinking No, this just cant be
happening, and the door shuts and I hear Ingrid say, Celia, youve got to go and Celia
protests, and as they stand on the other side of the door arguing about it I look around
desperately but theres no way out. This must be Ingrids apartment on Clark Street where I
have never been but here is all her stuff, overwhelming me, the Eames chair, the kidneyshaped
marble coffee table loaded with fashion magazines, the ugly orange couch we used
toI cast around wildly for something to wear, but the only textile in this minimal room is a
purple and yellow afghan thats clashing with the couch, so I grab it and wind it around
myself, hoist myself onto the couch and Ingrid opens the door again. She stands quietly for a
long moment and looks at me and I look at her and all I can think is oh, Ing, why did you do
this to yourself?
The Ingrid who lives in my memory is the incandescent blond angel of cool I met at
Jimbos Fourth of July party in 1988; Ingrid Carmichel was devastating and untouchable,
encased in gleaming armor made of wealth, beauty, and ennui. The Ingrid who stands
looking at me now is gaunt and hard and tired; she stands with her head tilted to one side and
looks at me with wonder and contempt. Neither of us seems to know what to say. Finally she
takes off her coat, tosses it on the chair, and perches at the other end of the couch. Shes
wearing leather pants. They squeak a little as she sits down.
Henry.
Ingrid.
What are you doing here?
I dont know. Im sorry. I justwell, you know. I shrug. My legs hurt so much that I
almost dont care where I am.
You look like shit.
Im in a lot of pain,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
349
Thats funny. So am I.
I mean physical pain.
Why? For all Ingrid cares I could be spontaneously combusting right in front of her. I
pull back the afghan and reveal my stumps.
She doesnt recoil and she doesnt gasp. She doesnt look away, and when she does she
looks me in the eyes and I see that Ingrid, of all people, understands perfectly. By entirely
separate processes we have arrived at the same condition. She gets up and goes into another
room, and when she comes back she has her old sewing kit in her hand. I feel a surge of
hope, and my hope is justified: Ingrid sits down and opens the lid and its just like the good
old days, theres a complete pharmacy in there with the pin cushions and thimbles.
What do you want? Ingrid asks.
Opiates. She picks through a baggie full of pills and offers me an assortment; I spot
Ultram and take two. After I swallow them dry she gets me a glass of water and I drink it
down.
Well. Ingrid runs her long red fingernails through her long blond hair. When are you
coming from?
December, 2006. Whats the date here?
Ingrid looks at her watch. It was New Years Day, but now its January 2. 1994.
Oh, no. Please no. Whats wrong? Ingrid says.
Nothing. Today is the day Ingrid will commit suicide. What can I say to her? Can I stop
her? What if I call someone? Listen, Ing, I just want to say.... I hesitate. What can I tell her
without spooking her? Does it matter now? Now that shes dead? Even though shes sitting
right here?
What?
Im sweating. Just...be nice to yourself. Dont...I mean, I know you arent very happy
Well, whose fault is that? Her bright red lipsticked mouth is set in a frown. I dont
answer. Is it my fault? I dont really know. Ingrid is staring at me as though she expects an
answer. I look away from her. I look at the Maholy-Nagy poster on the opposite wall.
Henry? Ingrid says. Why were you so mean to me?
I drag my eyes back to her. Was I? I didnt want to be.
Ingrid shakes her head. You didnt care if I lived or died.
Oh, Ingrid. I do care. I dont want you to die.
You didnt care. You left me, and you never came to the hospital. Ingrid speaks as
though the words choke her.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
350
Your family didnt want me to come. Your mom told me to stay away.
You should have come.
I sigh. Ingrid, your doctor told me I couldnt visit you.
I asked and they said you never called.
I called. I was told you didnt want to talk to me, and not to call anymore. The
painkiller is kicking in. The prickling pain in my legs dulls. I slide my hands under the
afghan and place my palms against the skin of my left stump, and then my right.
I almost died and you never spoke to me again.
I thought you didnt want to talk to me. How was I supposed to know?
You got married and you never called me and you invited Celia to the wedding to spite
me.
I laugh, I cant help it. Ingrid, Clare invited Celia. Theyre friends; Ive never figured out
why. Opposites attract, I guess. But anyway, it had nothing to do with you.
Ingrid says nothing. Shes pale under her makeup. She digs in her coat pocket and brings
out a pack of English Ovals and a lighter.
Since when do you smoke? I ask her. Ingrid hated smoking. Ingrid liked coke and
crystal meth and drinks with poetic names. She extracts a cigarette from the pack between
two long nails, and lights it. Her hands are shaking. She drags on the cigarette and smoke
curls from her lips.
So hows life without feet? Ingrid asks me. Howd that happen, anyway?
Frostbite. I passed out in Grant Park in January.
So how do you get around?
Wheelchair, mostly.
Oh. That sucks.
Yeah, I say. It does. We sit in silence for a moment.
Ingrid asks, Are you still married?
Yeah.
Kids?
One. A girl.
Oh. Ingrid leans back, drags on her cigarette, blows a thin stream of smoke from her
nostrils. I wish I had kids.
You never wanted kids, Ing.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
351
She looks at me, but I cant read the look. I always wanted kids. I didnt think you
wanted kids, so I never said anything.
You could still have kids.
Ingrid laughs. Could I? Do I have kids, Henry? In 2006 do I have a husband and a house
in Winnetka and 2.5 kids?
Not exactly. I shift my position on the couch. The pain has receded but whats left is the
shell of the pain, an empty space where there should be pain but instead there is the
expectation of pain.
Not exactly, Ingrid mimics. How not exactly? Like, as in, Not exactly, Ingrid, really
youre a bag lady?
Youre not a bag lady.
So Im not a bag lady. Okay, great. Ingrid stubs out her cigarette and crosses her legs. I
always loved Ingrids legs. Shes wearing boots with high heels. She and Celia must have
been to a party. Ingrid says, Weve eliminated the extremes: Im not a suburban matron and
Im not homeless. Come on, Henry, give me some more hints.
I am silent. I dont want to play this game.
Okay, lets make it multiple choice. Lets see... A) Im a stripper in a real sleazy club on
Rush Street. Um, B) Im in prison for ax-murdering Celia and feeding her to Malcolm. Heh.
Yeah, ah, C) Im living on the Rio del Sol with an investment banker. How bout it Henry?
Do any of those sound good to you?
Whos Malcolm?
Celias Doberman. Figures.
Ingrid plays with her lighter, flicking it on and off. How about D) Im dead? I flinch.
Does that appeal to you at all?
No. It doesnt.
Really? I like that one best. Ingrid smiles. Its not a pretty smile. Its more like a
grimace. I like that one so much that its given me an idea. She gets up and strides across
the room and down the hall. I can hear her opening and shutting a drawer. When she
reappears she has one hand behind her back. Ingrid stands in front of me, and says,
Surprise! and shes pointing a gun at me.
Its not a very big gun. Its slim and black and shiny. Ingrid holds it close to her waist,
casually, as though shes at a cocktail party. I stare at the gun. Ingrid says, I could shoot
you.
Yes. You could, I say.
Then I could shoot myself, she says.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
352
That could also happen.
But does it?
I dont know, Ingrid. You get to decide.
Bullshit, Henry. Tell me, Ingrid commands.
All right. No. It doesnt happen that way. I try to sound confident.
Ingrid smirks. But what if I want it to happen that way?
Ingrid, give me the gun.
Come over here and get it.
Are you going to shoot me? Ingrid shakes her head, smiling. I climb off the couch, onto
the floor, crawl toward Ingrid, trailing the afghan, slowed by the painkiller. She backs away,
holding the gun trained on me. I stop.
Come on, Henry. Nice doggie. Trusting doggie. Ingrid flicks off the safety catch and
takes two steps toward me. I tense. She is aiming point blank at my head. But then Ingrid
laughs, and places the muzzle of the gun against her temple. How about this, Henry? Does it
happen like this?
No. No!
She frowns. Are you sure, Henry? Ingrid moves the gun to her chest. Is this better?
Head or heart, Henry? Ingrid steps forward. I could touch her. I could grab herIngrid
kicks me in the chest and I fall backward, I am sprawled on the floor looking up at her and
Ingrid leans over and spits in my face.
Did you love me? Ingrid asks, looking down at me.
Yes, I tell her.
Liar, Ingrid says, and she pulls the trigger.
Monday, December 18, 2006 (Clare is 35, Henry is 43)
CLARE: I wake up in the middle of the night and Henry is gone. I panic. I sit up in bed. The
possibilities crowd into my mind. He could be run over by cars, stuck in abandoned
buildings, out in the coldI hear a sound, someone is crying. I think it is Alba, maybe Henry
went to see what was wrong with Alba, so I get up and go into Albas room, but Alba is
asleep, curled around Teddy, her blankets thrown off the bed. I follow the sound down the
hall and there, sitting on the living room floor, there is Henry, with his head in his hands.
I kneel beside him. Whats wrong? I ask him.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
353
Henry raises his face and I can see the shine of tears on his cheeks in the streetlight that
comes in the windows. Ingrids dead, Henry says.
I put my arms around him. Ingrids been dead for a long time, I say softly.
Henry shakes his head. Years, minutes...same thing, he says. We sit on the floor in
silence. Finally Henry says, Do you think its morning yet?
Sure. The sky is still dark. No birds are singing.
Lets get up, he says. I bring the wheelchair, help him into it, and wheel him into the
kitchen. I bring his bathrobe and Henry struggles into it. He sits at the kitchen table staring
out the window into the snow-covered backyard. Somewhere in the distance a snowplow
scrapes along a street. I turn on the light. I measure coffee into a filter, measure water into
the coffee maker, turn it on. I get out cups. I open the fridge, but when I ask Henry what he
wants to eat he just shakes his head. I sit down at the kitchen table opposite Henry and he
looks at me. His eyes are red and his hair is sticking out in many directions. His hands are
thin and his face is bleak.
It was my fault, Henry says. If I hadnt been there...
Could you have stopped her? I ask.
No. I tried.
Well, then.
The coffee maker makes little exploding noises. Henry runs his hands over his face. He
says, I always wondered why she didnt leave a note. I am about to ask him what he means
when I realize that Alba is standing in the kitchen doorway. Shes wearing a pink nightgown
and green mouse slippers. Alba squints and yawns in the harsh light of the kitchen.
Hi, kiddo, Henry says. Alba comes over to him and drapes herself over the side of his
wheelchair. Mmmmorning, Alba says.
Its not really morning, I tell her. Its really still nighttime.
How come you guys are up if its nighttime? Alba sniffs. Youre making coffee, so its
morning.
Oh, its the old coffee-equals-morning fallacy, Henry says. Theres a hole in your
logic, buddy.
What? Alba asks. She hates to be wrong about anything.
You are basing your conclusion on faulty data; that is, you are forgetting that your
parents are coffee fiends of the first order, and that we just might have gotten out of bed in
the middle of the night in order to drink MORE COFFEE. Hes roaring like a monster,
maybe a Coffee Fiend.
I want coffee, says Alba. I am a Coffee Fiend. She roars back at Henry. But he scoops
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
354
her off of him and plops her down on her feet. Alba runs around the table to me and throws
her arms around my shoulders. Roar! she yells in my ear.
I get up and pick Alba up. Shes so heavy now. Roar, yourself. I carry her down the hall
and throw her onto her bed, and she shrieks with laughter. The clock on her nightstand says
4:16 a.m. See? I show her. Its too early for you to get up. After the obligatory amount of
fuss Alba settles back into bed, and I walk back to the kitchen. Henry has managed to pour us
both coffee. I sit down again. Its cold in here.
Clare.
Mmm?
When Im dead Henry stops, looks away, takes a breath, begins again. Ive been
getting everything organized, all the documents, you know, my will, and letters to people,
and stuff for Alba, its all in my desk. I cant say anything. Henry looks at me.
When? I ask. Henry shakes his head. Months? Weeks? Days?
I dont know, Clare. He does know, I know he knows.
You looked up the obituary, didnt you? I say. Henry hesitates, and then nods. I open
my mouth to ask again, and then I am afraid.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
355
HOURS, IF NOT DAYS
Friday, December 24, 2006 (Henry is 43, Clare is 35)
HENRY: I wake up early, so early that the bedroom is blue in the almost-dawn light. I lie in
bed, listening to Clares deep breathing, listening to the sporadic noise of traffic on Lincoln
Avenue, crows calling to each other, the furnace shutting off. My legs ache. I prop myself up
on my pillows and find the bottle of Vicodin on my bedside table. I take two, wash them
down with flat Coke.
I slide back into the blankets and turn onto my side. Clare is sleeping face down, with her
arms wrapped protectively around her head. Her hair is hidden under the covers. Clare seems
smaller without her ambiance of hair. She reminds me of herself as a child, sleeping with the
simplicity she had when she was little. I try to remember if I have ever seen Clare as a child,
sleeping. I realize that I never have. Its Alba that I am thinking of. The light is changing.
Clare stirs, turns toward me, onto her side. I study her face. There are a few faint lines, at the
corners of her eyes and mouth, that are the merest suggestion of the beginnings of Clares
face in middle age. I will never see that face of hers, and I regret it bitterly, the face with
which Clare will go on without me, which will never be kissed by me, which will belong to a
world that I wont know, except as a memory of Clares, relegated finally to a definite past.
Today is the thirty-seventh anniversary of my mothers death. I have thought of her,
longed for her, every day of those thirty-seven years, and my father has, I think, thought of
her almost without stopping. If fervent memory could raise the dead, she would be our
Eurydice, she would rise like Lady Lazarus from her stubborn death to solace us. But all of
our laments could not add a single second to her life, not one additional beat of the heart, nor
a breath. The only thing my need could do was bring me to her. What will Clare have when I
am gone? How can I leave her?
I hear Alba talking in her bed. Hey, says Alba. Hey, Teddy! Shh, go to sleep now.
Silence. Daddy? I watch Clare, to see if she will wake up. She is still, asleep. Daddy! I
gingerly turn, carefully extricate myself from the blankets, maneuver myself to the floor. I
crawl out of our bedroom, down the hall and into Albas room. She giggles when she sees
me. I make a growling noise, and Alba pats my head as though I am a dog. She is sitting up
in bed, in the midst of every stuffed animal she has. Move over, Red Riding Hood. Alba
scoots aside and I lift myself onto the bed. She fussily arranges some of the toys around me. I
put my arm around her and lean back and she holds out Blue Teddy to me. He wants to eat
marshmallows.
Its a little early for marshmallows, Blue Teddy. How about some poached eggs and
toast?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
356
Alba makes a face. She does it by squinching together her mouth and eyebrows and nose.
Teddy doesnt like eggs, she announces.
Shhhh. Mamas sleeping.
Okay Alba whispers, loudly. Teddy wants blue Jell-O. I hear Clare groan and start to
get up in the other room.
Cream of Wheat? I cajole. Alba considers. With brown sugar? Okay.
You want to make it? I slide off the bed.
Yeah. Can I have a ride?
I hesitate. My legs really hurt, and Alba has gotten a little too big to do this painlessly, but
I can deny her nothing now. Sure. Hop on. I am on my hands and knees. Alba climbs onto
my back, and we make our way into the kitchen. Clare is standing sleepily by the sink,
watching coffee drip into the pot. I clamber up to her and butt my head against her knees and
she grabs Albas arms and hoists her up, Alba giggling madly all the while. I crawl into my
chair. Clare smiles and says, Whats for breakfast, cooks?
Jell-O! Alba shrieks.
Mmm. What kind of Jell-O? Cornflake Jell-O?
Nooooo!
Bacon Jell-O?
Ick! Alba wraps herself around Clare, pulls on her hair.
Ouch. Dont, sweetie. Well, it must be oatmeal Jell-O, then.
Cream of Wheat!
Cream of Wheat Jell-O, yum. Clare gets out the brown sugar and the milk and the
Cream of Wheat package. She sets them on the counter and looks at me inquiringly. How
bout you? Omelet Jell-O?
If youre making it, yeah. I marvel at Clares efficiency, moving around the kitchen as
though shes Betty Crocker, as though shes been doing this for years. Shell be okay without
me, I think as I watch her, but I know that she will not. I watch Alba mix the water and the
wheat together, and I think of Alba at ten, at fifteen, at twenty. It is not nearly enough, yet. I
am not done, yet. I want to be here. I want to see them, I want to gather them in my arms, I
want to live
Daddys crying Alba whispers to Clare.
Thats because he has to eat my cooking Clare tells her, and winks at me, and I have to
laugh.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
357
NEW YEARS EVE, TWO
Sunday, December 31, 2006 (Clare is 35, Henry is 43)
(7:25p.m.)
CLARE: Were having a party! Henry was kind of reluctant at first but he seems perfectly
content now. Hes sitting at the kitchen table showing Alba how to cut flowers out of carrots
and radishes. I admit that I didnt exactly play fair: I brought it up in front of Alba and she
got all excited and then he couldnt bear to disappoint her.
Itll be great, Henry. Well ask everyone we know.
Everyone? he queried, smiling.
Everyone we like , I amended. And so for days Ive been cleaning, and Henry and Alba
have been baking cookies (although half the dough goes into Albas mouth if we dont watch
her). Yesterday Charisse and I went to the grocery store and bought dips, chips, spreads,
every possible kind of vegetable, and beer, and wine, and champagne, little colored hors
douvres toothpicks, and napkins with Happy New Year printed in gold, and matching paper
plates and Lord knows what else. Now the whole house smells like meatballs and the rapidly
dying Christmas tree in the living room.
Alicia is here washing our wineglasses.
Henry looks up at me and says, Hey, Clare, its almost showtime. Go take your shower.
I glance at my watch and realize that yes, its time.
Into the shower and wash hair and dry hair and into underwear and bra, stockings and
black silk party dress, heels and a tiny dab of perfume and lipstick and one last look in the
mirror (I look startled) and back into the kitchen where Alba, oddly enough, is still pristine in
her blue velvet dress and Henry is still wearing his holey red flannel shirt and ripped-up blue
jeans.
Arent you going to change?
Ohyeah. Sure. Help me, huh? I wheel him into our bedroom.
What do you want to wear? Im hunting through his drawers for underwear and socks.
Whatever. You choose. Henry reaches over and shuts the bedroom door. Come here.
I stop riffing through the closet and look at Henry. He puts the brake on the wheelchair
and maneuvers his body onto the bed.
Theres no time I say.
Right, exactly. So lets not waste time talking. His voice is quiet and compelling. I flip
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
358
the lock on the door.
You know, I just got dressed
Shhh. He holds out his arms to me, and I relent, and sit beside him, and the phrase one
last time pops into my mind unbidden.
(8:05p.m.)
HENRY: The doorbell rings just as I am knotting my tie. Clare says nervously, Do I look all
right? She does, she is pink and lovely, and I tell her so. We emerge from the bedroom as
Alba runs to answer the door and starts yelling Grandpa! Grandpa! Kimy! My father
stomps his snowy boots and leans to hug her. Clare kisses him on both cheeks. Dad rewards
her with his coat. Alba commandeers Kimy and takes her to see the Christmas tree before she
even gets her coat off.
Hello, Henry, says Dad, smiling, leaning over me and suddenly it hits me: tonight my
life will flash before my eyes. Weve invited everyone who matters to us: Dad, Kimy, Alicia,
Gomez, Charisse, Philip, Mark and Sharon and their kids, Gram, Ben, Helen, Ruth, Kendrick
and Nancy and their kids, Roberto, Catherine, Isabelle, Matt, Amelia, artist friends of
Clares, library school friends of mine, parents of Albas friends, Clares dealer, even Celia
Attley, at Clares insistence...The only people missing have been unavoidably detained: my
mother, Lucille, Ingrid...Oh, God. Help me.
(8:20 p.m.)
CLARE: Gomez and Charisse come breezing in like kamikaze jet fighters. Hey Library Boy,
you lazy coot, dont you ever shovel your sidewalks?
Henry smacks his forehead. I knew I forgot something. Gomez dumps a shopping bag
full of CDs in Henrys lap and goes out to clean the walks. Charisse laughs and follows me
into the kitchen. She takes out a huge bottle of Russian vodka and sticks it in the freezer. We
can hear Gomez singing Let It Snow as he makes his way down the side of the house with
the shovel.
Where are the kids? I ask Charisse.
We parked them at my moms. Its New Years; we figured theyd have more fun with
Grandma. Plus we decided to have our hangovers in privacy, you know? Ive never given it
much thought, actually; I havent been drunk since before Alba was conceived. Alba comes
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
359
running into the kitchen and Charisse gives her an enthusiastic hug. Hey, Baby Girl! We
brought you a Christmas present!
Alba looks at me. Go ahead and open it. Its a tiny manicure set, complete with nail
polish. Alba is open-mouthed with awe. I nudge her, and she remembers.
 Thank you, Aunt Charisse.
Youre welcome, Alba.
Go show Daddy, I tell her, and she runs off in the direction of the living room. I stick
my head into the hall and I can see Alba gesturing excitedly at Henry, who holds out his
fmgers for her as though contemplating a fingernailectomy. Big hit, I tell Charisse.
She smiles. That was my trip when I was little. I wanted to be a beautician when I grew
up.
I laugh. But you couldnt hack it, so you became an artist.
I met Gomez and realized that nobody ever overthrew the bourgeois capitalist
misogynist corporate operating system by perming its hair.
Of course, we havent exactly been beating it to its knees by selling it art, either.
Speak for yourself, babe. Youre just addicted to beauty, thats all.
Guilty, guilty, guilty. We wander into the dining room and Charisse begins to load up
her plate. So what are you working on? I ask her.
Computer viruses as art.
Oooh. Oh, no. Isnt that kind of illegal?
Well; no. I just design them, then I paint the html onto canvas, then I have a show. I
dont actually put them into circulation.
But someone could.
Sure. Charisse smiles wickedly. I hope they do. Gomez scoffs, but some of these little
paintings could seriously inconvenience the World Bank and Bill Gates and those bastards
who make ATM machines.
Well, good luck. Whens the show?
May. Ill send you a card.
Yeah, when I get it Ill convert our assets into gold and lay in bottled water
Charisse laughs. Catherine and Amelia arrive, and we cease to speak of World Anarchy
Through Art and move on to admiring each others party dresses.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
360
(8:50 p.m.)
HENRY: The house is packed with our nearest and dearest, some of whom I havent seen
since before the surgery. Leah Jacobs, Clares dealer, is tactful and kind, but I find it difficult
to withstand the pity in her gaze. Celia surprises me by walking right up to me and offering
her hand. I take it, and she says, Im sorry to see you like this.
Well, you look great, I say, and she does. Her hair is done up really high and shes
dressed all in shimmery blue.
Uh-huh, says Celia in her fabulous toffee voice. I liked it better when you were bad
and I could just hate your skinny white self.
I laugh. Ah, the good old days.
She delves into her purse. I found this a long time ago in Ingrids stuff. I thought Clare
might want it. Celia hands me a photograph. Its a photo of me, probably from around 1990.
My hair is long and Im laughing, standing on Oak Street Beach, no shirt. Its a great
photograph. I dont remember Ingrid taking it, but then again, so much of my time with Ing
is kind of a blank now.
Yeah, I bet she would like it. Memento mori. I hand the picture back to her.
Celia glances at me sharply. Youre not dead, Henry DeTamble.
Im not far from it, Celia.
Celia laughs. Well, if you get to Hell before I do, save me a place next to Ingrid. She
turns abruptly and walks off in search of Clare.
(9:45 p.m.)
CLARE: The children have run around and eaten too much party food and now they are
sleepy but cranky. I pass Colin Kendrick in the hall and ask if he wants to take a nap; he tells
me very solemnly that hed like to stay up with the grown-ups. I am touched by his
politeness and his fourteen-year-olds beauty, his shyness with me even though hes known
me all his life. Alba and Nadia Kendrick are not so restrained. Mamaaa, Alba bleats, you
said we could stay up!
Sure you dont want to sleep for a while? Ill wake you up right before midnight.
 Nooooo. Kendrick is listening to this exchange and I shrug my shoulders and he
laughs.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
361
The Indomitable Duo. Okay, girls, why dont you go play quietly in Albas room for a
while. They shuffle off, grumbling. We know that within minutes theyll be playing
happily.
Its good to see you, Clare, Kendrick says as Alicia ambles over.
Hey, Clare. Get a load of Daddy. I follow Alicias gaze and realize that our father is
flirting with Isabelle. Who is that?
Oh, my god. Im laughing. Thats Isabelle Berk. I start to outline Isabelles draconian
sexual proclivities for Alicia. We are laughing so hard we can hardly breathe. Perfect,
perfect. Oh. Stop, Alicia says.
Richard comes over to us, drawn by our hysterics. Whats so funny, bella donnas?
We shake our heads, still giggling. Theyre mocking the mating rituals of their paternal
authority figure, says Kendrick. Richard nods, bemused, and asks Alicia about her spring
concert schedule. They wander off in the direction of the kitchen, talking Bucharest and
Bartok. Kendrick is still standing next to me, waiting to say something I dont want to hear. I
begin to excuse myself, and he puts his hand on my arm.
Wait, Clare I wait. Im sorry, he says.
Its okay, David. We stare at each other for a moment. Kendrick shakes his head,
rumbles for his cigarettes. If you ever want to come by the lab I could show you what Ive
been doing for Alba...I cast my eyes around the party, looking for Henry. Gomez is showing
Sharon how to rumba in the living room. Everyone seems to be having a good time, but
Henry is nowhere in sight. I havent seen him for at least forty-five minutes, and I feel a
strong urge to find him, make sure hes okay, make sure hes here. Excuse me, I tell
Kendrick, who looks like he wants to continue the conversation. Another time. When its
quieter. He nods. Nancy Kendrick appears with Colin in tow, making the topic impossible
anyway. They launch into a spirited discussion of ice hockey, and I escape.
(9:48 p.m.)
HENRY: It has become very warm in the house, and I need to cool off, so I am sitting on the
enclosed front porch. I can hear people talking in the living room. The snow is falling thick
and fast now, covering all the cars and bushes, softening their hard lines and deadening the
sound of traffic. Its a beautiful night. I open the door between the porch and the living room.
Hey, Gomez.
He comes trotting over and sticks his head through the doorway. Yeah?
Lets go outside.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
362
Its fucking cold out there.
Come on, you soft elderly alderman.
Something in my tone does the trick. All right, all right. Just a minute. He disappears
and comes back after a few minutes wearing his coat and carrying mine. As Im angling into
it he offers me his hip flask.
Oh, no thanks.
Vodka. Puts hair on your chest.
Clashes with opiates.
Oh, right. How quickly we forget. Gomez wheels me through the living room. At the
top of the stairs he lifts me out of the chair and I am riding on his back like a child, like a
monkey, and we are out the front door and out of doors and the cold air is like an
exoskeleton. I can smell the liquor in Gomezs sweat. Somewhere out there behind the
sodium vapor Chicago glare there are stars.
Comrade.
Umm?
Thanks for everything. Youve been the best I cant see his face, but I can feel
Gomez stiffen beneath all the layers of clothing.
What are you saying?
My own personal fat lady is singing, Gomez. Times up. Game over.
When?
Soon.
How soon?
I dont know, I lie. Very, very soon. Anyway, I just wanted to tell youI know Ive
been a pain in the ass every now and then, (Gomez laughs) but its been great (I pause,
because I am on the verge of tears) its been really great (and we stand there, inarticulate
American male creatures that we are, our breath freezing in clouds before us, all the possible
words left unspoken now) and finally I say, Lets go in, and we do. As Gomez gently
replaces me in the wheelchair he embraces me for a moment, and then walks heavily away
without looking back.
(10:15 p.m.)
CLARE: Henry isnt in the living room, which is filled with a small but determined group of
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
363
people trying to dance, in a variety of unlikely ways, to the Squirrel Nut Zippers. Charisse
and Matt are doing something that looks like the cha-cha, and Roberto is dancing with
considerable flair with Kimy, who moves delicately but steadfastly in a kind of fox trot.
Gomez has abandoned Sharon for Catherine, who whoops as he spins her and laughs when
he stops dancing to light a cigarette.
Henry isnt in the kitchen, which has been taken over by Raoul and James and Lourdes
and the rest of my artist friends. They are regaling each other with stories of terrible things
art dealers have done to artists, and vice versa. Lourdes is telling the one about Ed Kienholtz
making a kinetic sculpture that drilled a big hole in his dealers expensive desk. They all
laugh sadistically. I shake my finger at them. Dont let Leah hear you, I tease. Wheres
Leah? cries James. I bet she has some great stories He goes off in search of my dealer,
who is drinking cognac with Mark on the stairs.
Ben is making himself tea. He has a Ziplock baggie with all sorts of foul herbs in it,
which he measures carefully into a tea strainer and dunks into a mug of steaming water.
Have you seen Henry? I ask him.
Yeah, I was just talking to him. Hes on the front porch. Ben peers at me. Im kind of
worried about him. He seems very sad. He seemed Ben stops, makes a gesture with his
hand that means I might be wrong about this he reminded me of some patients I have, when
they dont expect to be around much longer.... My stomach tightens.
Hes been very depressed since his feet...
I know. But he was talking like he was getting on a train that was leaving momentarily,
you know, he told me Ben lowers his voice, which is always very quiet, so that I can
barely hear him: he told me he loved me, and thanked me.. .I mean, people, guys dont say
that kind of thing if they expect to be around, you know? Bens eyes are swimming behind
his glasses, and I put my arms around him, and we stand like that for a minute, my arms
encasing Bens wasted frame. Around us people are chattering, ignoring us. I dont want to
outlive anybody Ben says. Jesus. After drinking this awful stuff and just generally being a
bloody martyr for fifteen years I think Ive earned the right to have everybody I know file
past my casket and say, He died with his boots on. Or something like that. Im counting on
Henry to be there quoting Donne,  Death, be not proud, you stupid motherfucker. Itll be
beautiful.
I laugh. Well, if Henry cant make it, Ill come. I do a mean imitation of Henry. I raise
one eyebrow, lift my chin, lower my voice:  One short sleep past, we wake eternally, And
Death shall be sitting in the kitchen in his underwear at three in the morning, doing last
weeks crossword puzzle Ben cracks up. I kiss his pale smooth cheek and move on.
Henry is sitting by himself on the front porch, in the dark, watching it snow. Ive hardly
glanced out the window all day, and now I realize that its been snowing steadily for hours.
Snowplows are rattling down Lincoln Avenue, and our neighbors are out shoveling their
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
364
walks. Although the porch is enclosed its still cold out here.
Come inside, I say. I am standing beside him, watching a dog bounding in the snow
across the street. Henry puts his arm around my waist and leans his head on my hip.
I wish we could just stop time now, he says. Im running my fingers through his hair.
Its stiffer and thicker than it used to be, before it went gray.
Clare, he says.
Henry.
Its time... He stops.
What?
Its...Im....
My God. I sit down on the divan, facing Henry. Butdont. Just stay. I squeeze
his hands tightly.
It has already happened. Here, let me sit next to you. He swings himself out of his chair
and onto the divan. We lie back on the cold cloth. I am shivering in my thin dress. In the
house people are laughing and dancing. Henry puts his arm around me, warming me.
Why didnt you tell me? Why did you let me invite all these people? I dont want to be
angry, but I am.
I dont want you to be alone...after. And I wanted to say goodbye to everyone. Its been
good, it was a good last hurrah... We lie there silently for a while. The snow falls, silently.
What time is it?
I check my watch. A little after eleven. Oh, God. Henry grabs a blanket from the other
chair, and we wrap it around each other. I cant believe this. I knew that it was coming, soon,
had to come sooner or later, but here it is, and we are just lying here, waiting
Oh, why cant we do something! I whisper into Henrys neck.
Clare Henrys arms are wrapped around me. I close my eyes,
Stop it. Refuse to let it happen. Change it,
Oh, Clare. Henrys voice is soft and I look up at him, and his eyes shine with tears in
the light reflected by the snow. I lay my cheek against Henrys shoulder. He strokes my hair.
We stay like this for a long time. Henry is sweating. I put my hand on his face and hes
burning up with fever.
What time is it?
Almost midnight.
Im scared. I twine my arms through his, wrap my legs around his. Its impossible to
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
365
believe that Henry, so solid, my lover, this real body, which I am holding pressed to mine
with all my strength, could ever disappear:
Kiss me!
I am kissing Henry, and then I am alone, under the blanket, on the divan, on the cold
porch. It is still snowing. Inside, the record stops, and I hear Gomez say, Ten! nine! eight!
and everyone says, all together, seven! six! five! four! three! two! one! Happy New Year!
and a champagne cork pops, and everyone starts talking all at once, and someone says,
Where are Henry and Clare? Outside in the street someone sets off firecrackers. I put my
head in my hands and I wait.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
366
III
A TREATISE ON LONGING
His forty-third year. His small times end. His time
Who saw Infinity through the countless cracks
In the blank skin of things, and died of it.
 A. S. Byatt, Possession
She followed slowly, taking a long time,
as though there were some obstacle in the way;
and yet: as though, once it was overcome,
she would be beyond all walking, and would fly.
 from Going Blind,
Rainer Maria Rilke
translated by Stephen Mitchell
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
367
Saturday, October 27, 1984/Monday, January 1, 2007 (Henry is 43, Clare is 35)
HENRY: The sky is blank and Im falling into the tall dry grass let it be quick and even as I
try to be still the crack of a rifle sounds, far away, surely nothing to do with me but no: I am
slammed to the ground, I look at my belly which has opened up like a pomegranate, a soup
of entrails and blood cradled in the bowl of my body; it doesnt hurt at all that cant be right
but I can only admire this cubist version of my insides someone is running all I want is to see
Clare before before I am screaming her name Clare, Clare and Clare leans over me, crying,
and Alba whispers, Daddy....
Love you...
Henry
Always....
Oh God oh God
World enough....
No!
And time...
Henry!
CLARE: The living room is very still. Everyone stands fixed, frozen, staring down at us.
Billie Holiday is singing, and then someone turns off the CD player and there is silence. I sit
on the floor, holding Henry. Alba is crouching over him, whispering in his ear, shaking him.
Henrys skin is warm, his eyes are open, staring past me, he is heavy in my arms, so heavy,
his pale skin torn apart, red everywhere, ripped flesh framing a secret world of blood. I
cradle Henry. Theres blood at the corner of his mouth. I wipe it off. Firecrackers explode
somewhere nearby. Gomez says, I think wed better call the police.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
368
DISSOLUTION
Friday, February 2, 2007 (Clare is 35)
CLARE: I sleep all day. Noises flit around the housegarbage truck in the alley, rain, tree
rapping against the bedroom window. I sleep. I inhabit sleep firmly, willing it, wielding it,
pushing away dreams, refusing, refusing. Sleep is my lover now, my forgetting, my opiate,
my oblivion. The phone rings and rings. I have turned off the machine that answers with
Henrys voice. It is afternoon, it is night, it is morning. Everything is reduced to this bed, this
endless slumber that makes the days into one day, makes time stop, stretches and compacts
time until it is meaningless.
Sometimes sleep abandons me and I pretend, as though Etta has come to get me up for
school. I breathe slowly and deeply. I make my eyes still under eyelids, I make my mind still,
and soon, Sleep, seeing a perfect reproduction of himself, comes to be united with his
facsimile.
Sometimes I wake up and reach for Henry. Sleep erases all differences: then and now;
dead and living. I am past hunger, past vanity, past caring. This morning I caught sight of my
face in the bathroom mirror. I am paper-skinned, gaunt, yellow, ring-eyed, hair matted. I look
dead. I want nothing.
Kimy sits at the foot of the bed. She says, Clare? Albas home from school.. .wont you
let her come in, say hi? I pretend to sleep. Albas little hand strokes my face. Tears leak
from my eyes. Alba sets something, her knapsack? her violin case? on the floor and Kimy
says, Take off your shoes, Alba, and then Alba crawls into bed with me. She wraps my
arm around her, thrusts her head under my chin. I sigh and open my eyes. Alba pretends to
sleep. I stare at her thick black eyelashes, her wide mouth, her pale skin; she is breathing
carefully, she clutches my hip with her strong hand, she smells of pencil shavings and rosin
and shampoo. I kiss the top of her head. Alba opens her eyes, and then her resemblance to
Henry is almost more than I can bear. Kimy gets up and walks out of the room.
Later I get up, take a shower, eat dinner sitting at the table with Kimy and Alba. I sit at
Henrys desk after Alba has gone to bed, and I open the drawers, I take out the bundles of
letters and papers, and I begin to read.
A Letter to Be Opened in the Event of My Death
December 10, 2006
Dearest Clare,
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
369
As I write this, I am sitting at my desk in the back bedroom looking out at your studio
across the backyard full of blue evening snow, everything is slick and crusty with ice, and it
is very still. Its one of those winter evenings when the coldness of every single thing seems
to slow down time, like the narrow center of an hourglass which time itself flows through,
but slowly, slowly. I have the feeling, very familiar to me when I am out of time but almost
never otherwise, of being buoyed up by time, floating effortlessly on its surface like a fat
lady swimmer. I had a sudden urge, tonight, here in the house by myself (you are at Alicias
recital at St. Lucys) to write you a letter. I suddenly wanted to leave something, for after. I
think that time is short, now. I feel as though all my reserves, of energy, of pleasure, of
duration, are thin, small. I dont feel capable of continuing very much longer. I know you
know.
If you are reading this, I am probably dead. (I say probably because you never know what
circumstances may arise; it seems foolish and self-important to just declare ones own death
as an out-and-out fact.) About this death of mineI hope it was simple and clean and
unambiguous. I hope it didnt create too much fuss. Im sorry. (This reads like a suicide note.
Strange.) But you know: you know that if I could have stayed, if I could have gone on, that I
would have clutched every second: whatever it was, this death, you know that it came and
took me, like a child carried away by goblins.
Clare, I want to tell you, again, I love you. Our love has been the thread through the
labyrinth, the net under the high-wire walker, the only real thing in this strange life of mine
that I could ever trust. Tonight I feel that my love for you has more density in this world than
I do, myself: as though it could linger on after me and surround you, keep you, hold you.
I hate to think of you waiting. I know that you have been waiting for me all your life,
always uncertain of how long this patch of waiting would be. Ten minutes, ten days. A
month. What an uncertain husband I have been, Clare, like a sailor, Odysseus alone and
buffeted by tall waves, sometimes wily and sometimes just a plaything of the gods. Please,
Clare. When I am dead. Stop waiting and be free. Of meput me deep inside you and then
go out in the world and live. Love the world and yourself in it, move through it as though it
offers no resistance, as though the world is your natural element. I have given you a life of
suspended animation. I dont mean to say that you have done nothing. You have created
beauty, and meaning, in your art, and Alba, who is so amazing, and for me: for me you have
been everything.
After my mom died she ate my father up completely. She would have hated it. Every
minute of his life since then has been marked by her absence, every action has lacked
dimension because she is not there to measure against. And when I was young I didnt
understand, but now, I know, how absence can be present, like a damaged nerve, like a dark
bird.
If I had to live on without you I know I could not do it. But I hope, I have this vision of
you walking unencumbered, with your shining hair in the sun. I have not seen this with my
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
370
eyes, but only with my imagination, that makes pictures, that always wanted to paint you,
shining; but I hope that this vision will be true, anyway.
Clare, there is one last thing, and I have hesitated to tell you, because Im superstitiously
afraid that telling might cause it to not happen (I know: silly) and also because I have just
been going on about not waiting and this might cause you to wait longer than you have ever
waited before. But I will tell you in case you need something, after.
Last summer, I was sitting in Kendricks waiting room when I suddenly found myself in a
dark hallway in a house I dont know. I was sort of tangled up in a bunch of galoshes, and it
smelled like rain. At the end of the hall I could see a rim of light around a door, and so I went
very slowly and very quietly to the door and looked in. The room was white, and intensely lit
with morning sun. At the window, with her back to me, sat a woman, wearing a coral-colored
cardigan sweater, with long white hair all down her back. She had a cup of tea beside her, on
a table. I must have made some little noise, or she sensed me behind her...she turned and saw
me, and I saw her, and it was you, Clare, this was you as an old woman, in the future. It was
sweet, Clare, it was sweet beyond telling, to come as though from death to hold you, and to
see the years all present in your face. I wont tell you any more, so you can imagine it, so you
can have it unrehearsed when the time comes, as it will, as it does come. We will see each
other again, Clare. Until then, live, fully, present in the world, which is so beautiful.
Its dark, now, and I am very tired. I love you, always. Time is nothing.
Henry
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
371
DASEIN
Saturday, July 12, 2008 (Clare is 37)
CLARE: Charisse has taken Alba and Rosa and Max and Joe roller skating at the Rainbo. I
drive over to her house to pick Alba up, but Im early and Charisse is running late. Gomez
answers the door wearing a towel.
Come on in, he says, opening the door wide. Want some coffee?
Sure. I follow him through their chaotic living room to the kitchen. I sit at the table,
which is still littered with breakfast dishes, and clear a space large enough to rest my elbows.
Gomez rambles around the kitchen, making coffee.
Havent seen your mug in a while.
Ive been pretty busy. Alba takes all these different lessons, and I just drive her around.
You making any art? Gomez sets a cup and saucer in front of me and pours coffee into
the cup. Milk and sugar are already on the table, so I help myself.
No.
Oh. Gomez leans against the kitchen counter, hands wrapped around his coffee cup. His
hair is dark with water and combed back flat. Ive never noticed before that his hairline is
receding. Well, other than chauffeuring her highness, what are you doing?
What am I doing? I am waiting. I am thinking. I am sitting on our bed holding an old
plaid shirt that still smells of Henry, taking deep breaths of his smell I am going for walks at
two in the morning, when Alba is safe in her bed, long walks to tire myself out enough to
sleep. I am conducting conversations with Henry as though he were here with me, as though
he could see through my eyes, think with my brain.
Not much.
Hmm.
How bout you?
Oh, you know. Aldermanning. Playing the stern paterfamilias. The usual.
Oh. I sip my coffee. I glance at the clock over the sink. It is shaped like a black cat: its
tail twitches back and forth like a pendulum and its big eyes move in time with each twitch,
ticking loudly. Its 11:45,
Do you want anything to eat?
I shake my head. No, thanks. Judging from the dishes on the table, Gomez and Charisse
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
372
had honeydew melon, scrambled eggs, and toast for breakfast. The children ate Lucky
Charms, Cheerios, and something that had peanut butter on it. The table is like an
archeological reconstruction of a twenty-first-century family breakfast.
Are you dating anybody? I look up and Gomez is still leaning on the counter, still
holding his coffee cup at chin level.
No.
Why not?
None of your business, Gomez. It never occurred to me.
You should think about it. He sets his cup in the sink.
Why?
You need something new. Someone new. You cant sit around for the rest of your life
waiting for Henry to show up.
Sure I can. Watch me.
Gomez takes two steps and hes standing next to me. He leans over and puts his mouth
next to my ear. Dont you ever miss.. .this? He licks the inside of my ear. Yes, I miss that.
Get away from me, Gomez, I hiss at him, but I dont move away. I am riveted in my seat
by an idea. Gomez picks up my hair and kisses the back of my neck.
Come to me, oh! come to me!
I close my eyes. Hands pull me out of my seat, unbutton my shirt. Tongue on my neck,
my shoulders, my nipples. I reach out blindly and find terrycloth, a bath towel that falls
away. Henry. Hands unbutton my jeans, pull them down, bend me back over the kitchen
table. Something falls to the floor, metallic. Food and silverware, a half-circle of plate, melon
rind against my back. My legs spread. Tongue on my cunt. Ohh... We are in the meadow.
Its summer. A green blanket. We have just eaten, the taste of melon is still in my mouth.
Tongue gives way to empty space, wet and open. I open my eyes; Im staring at a half-full
glass of orange juice. I close my eyes. The firm, steady push of Henrys cock into me. Yes.
Ive been waiting very patiently, Henry. I knew youd come back sooner or later. Yes. Skin
on skin, hands on breasts, push pull clinging rhythm deeper yes, oh
Henry
Everything stops. A clock is ticking loudly. I open my eyes. Gomez is staring down at me,
hurt? angry? in a moment he is expressionless. A car door slams. I sit up, jump off the table,
run for the bathroom. Gomez throws my clothes in after me.
As Im dressing I hear Charisse and the kids come in the front door, laughing. Alba calls,
Mama? and I yell Ill be out in a minute! I stand in the dim light of the pink and black
tiled bathroom and stare at myself in the mirror. I have Cheerios in my hair. My reflection
looks lost and pale. I wash my hands, try to comb my hair with my fingers. What am I doing?
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
373
What have I allowed myself to become?
An answer comes, of sorts: You are the traveler now.
Saturday, July 26, 2008 (Clare is 37)
CLARE: Albas reward for being patient at the galleries while Charisse and I look at art is to
go to Ed Debevics, a faux diner that does a brisk tourist trade. As soon as we walk in the
door its sensory overload circa 1964. The Kinks are playing at top volume and theres
signage everywhere:
If youre really a good customer youd order more!!!
Please talk clearly when placing your order.
Our coffee is so good we drink it ourselves!
Today is evidently balloon-animal day; a gentleman in a shiny purple suit whips up a
wiener dog for Alba and then turns it into a hat and plants it on her head. She squirms with
joy. We stand in line for half an hour and Alba doesnt whine at all; she watches the waiters
and waitresses flirt with each other and silently evaluates the other childrens balloon
animals. We are finally escorted to a booth by a waiter wearing thick horn-rimmed glasses
and a name tag that says SPAZ. Charisse and I flip open our menus and try to find something
we want to eat amidst the Cheddar Fries and the meatloaf. Alba just chants the word
milkshake over and over. When Spaz reappears Alba has a sudden attack of shyness and has
to be coaxed into telling him that she would like a peanut butter milkshake (and a small order
of fries, because, I tell her, its too decadent to eat nothing but a milkshake for lunch).
Charisse orders macaroni and cheese and I order a BLT. Once Spaz leaves Charisse sings, 
Alba and Spaz, sitting in a tree, K-I-S-S-I-N-G... and Alba shuts her eyes and puts her hands
over her ears, shaking her head and smiling. A waiter with a name tag that says BUZZ struts
up and down the lunch counter doing karaoke to Bob Segers I Love That Old Time Rock and
Roll.
I hate Bob Seger  Charisse says. Do you think it took him more than thirty seconds to
write that song?
The milkshake arrives in a tall glass with a bendable straw and a metal shaker that
contains the milkshake that couldnt fit into the glass. Alba stands up to drink it, stands on
tiptoe to achieve the best possible angle for sucking down a peanut butter milkshake. Her
balloon wiener dog hat keeps sliding down her forehead, interfering with her concentration.
She looks up at me through her thick black eyelashes and pushes the balloon hat up so that it
is clinging to her head by static electricity.
Whens Daddy coming home? she asks. Charisse makes the sound that one makes when
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
374
one has accidentally gotten Pepsi up ones nose and starts to cough and I pound her on the
back until she makes hand gestures at me to stop so I stop.
August 29th, I tell Alba, who goes back to slurping the dregs of her shake while
Charisse looks at me reproachfully.
Later, were in the car, on Lake Shore Drive; Im driving and Charisse is fiddling with the
radio and Alba is sleeping in the back seat. I exit at Irving Park and Charisse says, Doesnt
Alba know that Henry is dead?
Of course she knows. She saw him I remind Charisse.
Well, why did you tell her he was coming home in August?
Because he is. He gave me the date himself.
Oh. Even though my eyes are on the road I can feel Charisse staring at me. Isnt that..
.kind of weird?
Alba loves it.
For you, though?
I never see him. I try to keep my voice light, as though I am not tortured by the
unfairness of this, as though I dont mourn my resentment when Alba tells me about her
visits with Henry even as I drink up every detail.
Why not me, Henry? I ask him silently as I pull into Charisse and Gomezs toy-littered
driveway. Why only Alba? But as usual theres no answer to this. As usual, thats just how it
is. Charisse kisses me and gets out of the car, walks sedately toward her front door, which
magically swings open, revealing Gomez and Rosa. Rosa is jumping up and down and
holding something out toward Charisse, who takes it from her and says something, and gives
her a big hug. Gomez stares at me, and finally gives me a little wave. I wave back. He turns
away. Charisse and Rosa have gone inside. The door closes.
I sit there, in the driveway, Alba sleeping in the back seat. Crows are walking on the
dandelion-infested lawn. Henry, where are you? I lean my head against the steering wheel.
Help me. No one answers. After a minute I put the car in gear, back out of the driveway, and
make my way toward our silent, waiting home.
Saturday, September 3, 1990 (Henry is 27)
HENRY: Ingrid and I have lost the car and we are drunk. We are drunk and it is dark and we
have walked up and down and back and around and no car. Fucking Lincoln Park. Fucking
Lincoln Towing. Fuck.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
375
Ingrid is pissed off. She walks ahead of me, and her whole back, even the way her hips
move, is pissed off. Somehow this is my fault. Fucking Park West nightclub. Why would
anyone put a nightclub in wretched yuppieville Lincoln Park where you cannot leave your
car for more than ten seconds without Lincoln Towing hauling it off to their lair to gloat over
it
Henry.
What?
Theres that little girl again.
What little girl?
The one we saw earlier. Ingrid stops. I look where she is pointing.
The girl is standing in the doorway of a flower shop. Shes wearing something dark, so all
I see is her white face and her bare feet. Shes maybe seven or eight; too young to be out
alone in the middle of the night. Ingrid walks over to the girl, who watches her impassively.
Are you okay? Ingrid asks the girl. Are you lost?
The girl looks at me and says, I was lost, but now Ive figured out where I am. Thank
you, she adds politely.
Do you need a ride home? We could give you a ride if we ever manage to find the car.
Ingrid is leaning over the girl. Her face is maybe a foot away from the girls face. As I walk
up to them I see that the girl is wearing a mans windbreaker. It comes all the way down to
her ankles.
No, thank you. I live too far away, anyhow. The girl has long black hair and startling
dark eyes; in the yellow light of the flower shop she looks like a Victorian match girl, or
DeQuinceys Ann.
Wheres your mom? Ingrid asks her. The girl replies, Shes at home. She smiles at
me and says, She doesnt know Im here.
Did you run away? I ask her.
No, she says, and laughs. I was looking for my daddy, but Im too early, I guess. Ill
come back later. She squeezes past Ingrid and pads over to me, grabs my jacket and pulls
me toward her. The cars across the street, she whispers. I look across the street and there it
is, Ingrids red Porsche. Thanks I begin, and the girl darts a kiss at me that lands near
my ear and then runs down the sidewalk, her feet slapping the concrete as I stand staring
after her. Ingrid is quiet as we get into the car. Finally I say, That was strange, and she
sighs and says, Henry, for a smart person you can be pretty damn dense sometimes, and
she drops me off in front of my apartment without another word.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
376
Sunday, July 29, 1979 (Henry is 42)
HENRY: Its sometime in the past. Im sitting on Lighthouse Beach with Alba. Shes ten. Im
forty-two. Both of us are time traveling. Its a warm evening, maybe July or August. Im
wearing a pair of jeans and a white T-shirt I stole from a fancy North Evanston mansion;
Alba is wearing a pink nightgown she took from an old ladys clothesline. Its too long for
her so we have tied it up around her knees. People have been giving us strange looks all
afternoon. I guess we dont exactly look like an average father and daughter at the beach. But
we have done our best; we have swum, and we have built a sand castle. We have eaten
hotdogs and fries we bought from the vendor in the parking lot. We dont have a blanket, or
any towels, and so we are kind of sandy and damp and pleasantly tired, and we sit watching
little children running back and forth in the waves and big silly dogs loping after them. The
sun is setting behind us as we stare at the water.
Tell me a story, says Alba, leaning against me like cold cooked pasta.
I put my arm around her. What kind of story?
A good story. A story about you and Mama, when Mama was a little girl
Hmm. Okay. Once upon a time
When was that?
All times at once. A long time ago, and right now.
Both?
Yes, always both.
How can it be both?
Do you want me to tell this story or not?
Yeah....
All right then. Once upon a time, your mama lived in a big house beside a meadow, and
in the meadow was a place called the clearing where she used to go to play. And one fine day
your mama, who was only a tiny thing whose hair was bigger than she was, went out to the
clearing and there was a man there
With no clothes!
With not a stitch on him I agree. And after your mama had given him a beach towel
she happened to be carrying so he could have something to wear, he explained to her that he
was a time traveler, and for some reason she believed him
Because it was true! .
Well, yes, but how was she going to know that? Anyway, she did believe him, and
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
377
then later on she was silly enough to marry him and here we are,
Alba punches me in the stomach. Tell it right she demands.
Ooof. How can I tell anything if you beat on me like that? Geez.
Alba is quiet. Then she says, How come you never visit Mama in the future?
I dont know, Alba. If I could, Id be there. The blue is deepening over the horizon and
the tide is receding. I stand up and offer Alba my hand, pull her up. As she stands brushing
sand from her nightgown she stumbles toward me and says, Oh! and is gone and I stand
there on the beach holding a damp cotton nightgown and staring at Albas slender footprints
in the fading light.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
378
RENASCENCE
Thursday, December 4, 2008 (Clare is 37)
CLARE: Its a cold, bright morning. I unlock the door of the studio and stamp snow off my
boots. I open the shades, turn up the heat. I start a pot of coffee brewing. I stand in the empty
space in the middle of the studio and I look around me.
Two years worth of dust and stillness lies over everything. My drawing table is bare. The
beater sits clean and empty. The molds and deckles are neatly stacked, coils of armature wire
sit untouched by the table. Paints and pigments, jars of brushes, tools, books; all are just as I
left them. The sketches I had thumbtacked to the wall have yellowed and curled. I untack
them and throw them in the wastebasket.
I sit at my drawing table and I close my eyes.
The wind is rattling tree branches against the side of the house, A car splashes through
slush in the alley. The coffeemaker hisses and gurgles as it spits the last spurt of coffee into
the pot. I open my eyes, shiver and pull my heavy sweater closer.
When I woke up this morning I had an urge to come here. It was like a flash of lust: an
assignation with my old lover, art. But now Im sitting here waiting for.. .something.. .to
come to me and nothing comes. I open a flat file drawer and take out a sheet of indigo-dyed
paper. Its heavy and slightly rough, deep blue and cold to the touch like metal. I lay it on the
table. I stand and stare at it for a while. I take out a few pieces of soft white pastel and weigh
them in my palm. Then I put them down and pour myself some coffee. I stare out the
window at the back of the house. If Henry were here he might be sitting at his desk, might be
looking back at me from the window above his desk. Or he might be playing Scrabble with
Alba, or reading the comics, or making soup for lunch. I sip my coffee and try to feel time
revert, try to erase the difference between now and then. It is only my memory that holds me
here. Time, let me vanish. Then what we separate by our very presence can come together.
I stand in front of the sheet of paper, holding a white pastel. The paper is vast, and I begin
in the center, bending over the paper though I know I would be more comfortable at the
easel. I measure out the figure, half-life-sized: here is the top of the head, the groin, the heel
of the foot. I rough in a head. I draw very lightly, from memory: empty eyes, here at the
midpoint of the head, long nose, bow mouth slightly open. The eyebrows arch in surprise:
oh, its you. The pointed chin and the round jawline, the forehead high and the ears only
indicated. Here is the neck, and the shoulders that slope into arms that cross protectively over
the breasts, here is the bottom of the rib cage, the plump stomach, full hips, legs slightly bent,
feet pointing downward as though the figure is floating in midair. The points of measurement
are like stars in the indigo night sky of the paper; the figure is a constellation. I indicate
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
379
highlights and the figure becomes three dimensional, a glass vessel. I draw the features
carefully, create the structure of the face, fill in the eyes, which regard me, astonished at
suddenly existing. The hair undulates across the paper, floating weightless and motionless,
linear pattern that makes the static body dynamic. What else is in this universe, this drawing?
Other stars, far away. I hunt through my tools and find a needle. I tape the drawing over a
window and I begin to prick the paper full of tiny holes, and each pin prick becomes a sun in
some other set of worlds. And when I have a galaxy full of stars I prick out the figure, which
now becomes a constellation in earnest, a network of tiny lights, I regard my likeness, and
she returns my gaze. I place my finger on her forehead and say, Vanish, but it is she who
will stay; I am the one who is vanishing.
The Time Travelers Wife Audrey Niffenegger
380
ALWAYS AGAIN
Thursday, July 24, 2053 (Henry is 43, Clare is 82)
HENRY: I find myself in a dark hallway. At the end of the hall is a door, slightly open with
white light spilling around its edges. The hall is full of galoshes and rain coats. I walk slowly
and silently to the door and carefully look into the next room. Morning light fills up the room
and is painful at first, but as my eyes adjust I see that in the room is a plain wooden table
next to a window. A woman sits at the table facing the window. A teacup sits at her elbow.
Outside is the lake, the waves rush up the shore and recede with calming repetition which
becomes like stillness after a few minutes. The woman is extremely still. Something about
her is familiar. She is an old woman; her hair is perfectly white and lies long on her back in a
thin stream, over a slight dowagers hump. She wears a sweater the color of coral. The curve
of her shoulders, the stiffness in her posture say here is someone who is very tired, and I am
very tired, myself. I shift my weight from one foot to the other and the floor creaks; the
woman turns and sees me and her face is remade into joy; I am suddenly amazed; this is
Clare, Clare old! and she is coming to me, so slowly, and I take her into my arms.
Monday, July 14, 2053 (Clare is 82)
CLARE: This morning everything is clean; the storm has left branches strewn around the
yard, which I will presently go out and pick up: all the beachs sand has been redistributed
and laid down fresh in an even blanket pocked with impressions of rain, and the daylilies
bend and glisten in the white seven a.m. light. I sit at the dining room table with a cup of tea,
looking at the water, listening. Waiting.
Today is not much different from all the other days. I get up at dawn, put on slacks and a
sweater, brush my hair, make toast, and tea, and sit looking at the lake, wondering if he will
come today. Its not much different from the many other times he was gone, and I waited,
except that this time I have instructions: this time I know Henry will come, eventually. I
sometimes wonder if this readiness, this expectation, prevents the miracle from happening.
But I have no choice. He is coming, and I am here.
